CHAPTER ONE
Old Sergei walked in front. All the conversation Seryozha
had, for the space of fifteen miles, was the expression of his
father's neck. The back of Old Sergei's neck was a little like
a tortoise's neck, but more speaking. The neck spoke of
duty about to be done—rapturously unpleasant duty. It
was a nagging, over-articulate neck, but of course Seryozha
was so well used to it that he did not think of it as any-
thing except just Father's Neck. He knew, however, with-
out knowing that he knew, that his father was satisfied to
be followed on an unpleasant duty by an unwilling son.
The road returned and returned again to the river, cross-
ing and recrossing it. The road and the river could not part
because of the narrowness of the gorge; they could not even
find room to run peacefully parallel, but got in each other's
way. It was like the mutual irritation of marriage. But it
was beautiful. The sunny side of the gorge was lacquered
with flowers; the shadowed side was dark and stormy with
color. The grass had an electric sheen on it, in memory of
rain. Even Seryozha's dog had picked a flower by mistake;
it was caught in the clasp of its collar, a blue two-winged
butterfly of a flower.
fiiil 2 fitil
Every time Seryozha waded across a ford he sang with
excitement. The streaked blue-and-yellow water piled up
against his thighs, his strong striding legs were like blunt
scissors tearing silk. The great patched cliffs, the hills, the
fiery flowers, were all very far away, very still and very
alien, as though seen through glass, and Seryozha, singing
hoarsely, was isolated in a dizzy world—
a tall indomitable
young rock in a storm, a little god inclosed in a roaring
private universe.
"I am wet," said Old Sergei, standing bent double on a
bank, unrolling his wet trousers. '1 am just as wet if I roll
up my trousers as if I leave them as they are."
'Then leave them as they are," said Seryozha, turning
himself round to enjoy the feeling of the warm wind on hot
legs through wet trousers.
"Then they will shrink."
"What of it? You are shrinking yourself," said his son.
Old Sergei flirted his trousers a little petulantly. It was
certainly true that he was shrinking. But he thought rather
highly of his trousers; it was so long since he had moved
among real trousered men that he thought his looked like
real trousers. They were made by Anna, his wife; his hair
was cut by Anna, his shoes were adapted by Anna from
Chinese cloth shoes. He was a home-made old man.
Ser)^ozha watched, without anxiety, his dog valiantly fol-
lowing him across the stream. The dog rushed with high
bounds into the swift water, and, after a little wallowing,
lost its footing. The water spun it about, noosed it, and
dragged it under, but the dog kept its head while losing its
dignity and was able to shape some kind of wild course. It
ran around, tail first and upside down, on a mudbank, and
rose and shook itself complacently as though the crossing
had happened exactly as it had intended. It had, however,
lost the little flower out of its collar.
"There are some soldiers," said Seryozha.
)
"What of it?" said Old Sergei, with a shght nervous
twitch in his voice. "They must be Li's men, certainly."
But he looked with an anxious short-sighted squint across
the river at the soldiers. (Anna, his wife, did not know how
to make spectacles.
The Chinese soldiers, sitting on a hooded Manchurian
cart, swung, creaked, and clanked round the opposite bend
into the river. The jolt, as the cart flopped from the bank
into the stream, threw all the soldiers backward, so that
their thin shabby shanks waved in the air. This contretemps
spoiled their accuracy in hitting off the ford, and hardly
had they regained their seating when the current swept their
cart off its wheels. The horses, pulling at a right angle, were
its only anchor. The five horses strained and clawed at the
submerged boulders; some of them stumbled, but their
senior horse—the only one pulling in shafts—
its strong
shoulders heaving under the high arched Russian yoke,
saved the situation. That was what it was paid for. The
soldiers all laughed as the bank was reached, but the horses
hung their heads, blew their noses, and sighed.
Old Sergei, Seryozha, and the soldiers looked at one an-
other. All the soldiers were dressed in gray cotton uniforms
made for bigger men. Whyis this, I wonder? The Chinese
Army Clothing Department must possess a tailor's dummy
of ideal size. I imagine them sitting at the feet of their
Utopian waxillusion, busy with their sewing-machines, never
looking out-of-doors to see their poor actual champions,
stunted and bent and lame, trudging like little skeletons
across the mud of China's devastated fields. Alittle hke the
Lady of Shalott—but not, on second thoughts, very.
"Have you a cigarette?" said one soldier. Seryozha had
one behind his ear. It had already been partly smoked and
there was little left of it except the long cardboard mouth-
piece, but the soldiers handed it round eagerly from one to
another; they were used to makeshifts.
"Are you English?" asked the corporal, after spitting
noisily as if to show that whatever they were they weren't
worth much.
"No, we are White Russians. . . . We have a letter,"
stammered Old Sergei. "'We are friends of your general, Li
Lien-ching. .
."
He was much pleased that his sensitive trousers should
have been mistaken for English trousers.
All the soldiers summarized his remark one to another, in
the Chinese manner. 'They are friends of Li Lien-ching.
Hao-hao. . . . They are White Big-noses known to the gen-
eral. . . . General Li knows them; they are Big-noses.. . .
They have letters. ... It is an old Big-nose and his son
who say they are friends of Li Lien-ching.. .
." In a few
minutes they all found that they had mastered these facts,
and the corporal held out his hand for General Li's letter.
The reading of the letter took a very long time. It had a
pretty red and black border and was additionally beautified
by a few bold characters expressing General Li's trust in Old
Sergei's integrity. The soldiers looked upon it as an educa-
tion in itself, and several of them committed to memory
those characters which were new to them, writing invisible
examples in the palms of their hands for one another's
benefit.
"Howmuch did you pay for the buckle of your belt?" the
corporal asked Seryozha magisterially.
"One small frog," replied Seryozha, who spoke Chinese
much better than his father, having lived two-thirds of his
eighteen years of life in a Chinese village. "I gave another
Russian boy one small tame green frog with a red stomach
for this buckle."
"One small frog—heboughthis buckle for one frog.. . .
A frog for a buckle. ... A buckle for a frog.. . . The
frog was exchanged for a buckle. . .
." The simple fellows.
ElJl 5 £iiil
telling one another the joke, appreciated it more and more.
"Ha-ha! . . . Hao-hao!... A buckle for a frog!... A
frog for a buckle. . . . Ha-ha! . . . Hao-hao! . .
."
"Where are you going?" the corporal persisted, hoping
against hope that this might elicit another joke—perhaps
about frogs again.
"We are going to see if we can help our friends," said
Old Sergei, looking at the soldiers a little doubtfully. "Some
White Russian soldiers in the army of your General Li
were attacked somewhere near here by Chen's men, and
some were killed and some wounded, we hear. We only
heard about it in Chi-tao-kou this morning. We are going
to bury our dead."
"To bury their dead," said the soldiers one to another,
still laughing, since death is among the things that raise a
smile in China. "They are going to bury their dead. . . .
Big-noses want to bury Big-noses.. . . Ha-ha! . . . Hao-
hao! . .
."
"It is forty li from Chi-tao-kou," said a soldier. "You
must have walked fast. Big-noses have long legs. You can
sit on our cart. Weare going your way."
"Is Chen's army still in the neighborhood?"
"No, there was no army—
it was only a small party of
Chen's men that found the Big-noses off their guard. They
must be two hundred li away by now."
Old Sergei and Seryozha sat on the cart, their wet legs
dangling over the wheels in a row with the soldiers' weather-
beaten ankles. The cart staggered along to the tune of a
titter of bells and a ripping of whips and a snarling of driv-
ers. The road lost itself among boulders. It became merged
for miles with the cascading river bed. The cart never had
four wheels on the ground at once. Soldiers' heads were
knocked together; somebody's shoulder came in violent
contact with Old Sergei's front gums. Seryozha, after won-
dering for a few minutes whether to be footsore was really
worse than to be seatsore, jumped off the cart and stumbled
down the heaped, gashed trail.
He walked more quickly than the laboring cart and at
the turn of the gorge waited for it. Great ghostly clouds had
been bowling up like smoke out of the peaks of the hills.
Raindrops fell on Seryozha's nose—chin—hand—neck—
then a wave of rain leapt over the near hill. He stood just
inside a deserted and ruined Korean hut, waiting for the
cart, watching the rain. The flowery slopes waved under the
flying clouds. Far ahead there was a dwindling horizontal
strip of calm blue sky strung like a taut cord over the stormy
valley.
The mud floor of the hut was strewn with old sacks,
straw, rags, broken crocks, and a crumpled brazier. It must
be a very poor thing that is discarded as useless by a Korean.
Part of one wall had fallen in and the thatch sagged and
dripped. A gawky sunflower hung its silly head in the door-
way. There was a smell of dirty humanity mixed with the
smell of horse and wet grass.
Seryozha stood in the doorway and looked up a windy
slope spotted with scrub-oaks and magenta azaleas. Against
the outer wall of the shack, near the door, was a Korean
oven, balancing a crooked jointed chimney on its shoulder
as a juggler might balance a pile of top-hats. The oven's
gaping lips were smeared with cold damp ashes. From be-
hind the oven, across a puddle in the red mud, protruded
a dead hand, palm upward.
Seryozha stared at the hand, his mind making no com-
ment, only registering the fact—
a dead man—
a dead man
—
a dead man. ... In two strides he stood beside the
dead man. He looked down at the heavy, fair, unshaven
face of a Russian soldier. Raindrops stood on the cheeks
like tears; the eyes watched the sky intently and anxiously.
The dead man had no boots on and no gun. His tunic was
open at the neck to show a broken string. How curious to
be robbed and not mind, thought Seryozha, and at once
this seemed to him the most starthng thing about death—
the loss of the dehght in possession. He thought of the
property he himself loved so anxiously—his silk handker-
chief, his spangled gilt picture of the crowned Christ, his
English sweater that the missionaries had given him, his
marvellously complete sloughed snakeskin (even the skin
of the eyeballs unbroken) that lived in an abalone shell in
a biscuit-box, the ribbon that Sonia gave him, his chisel with
the black handle. ... It was quite unimaginable that
these things might be taken away before his open, indiffer-
ent eyes. This was death. The snakeskin would suddenly
become no marvel but a thing good only for the rubbish
heap; (oh, he would rise from the dead to prevent his
mother from using the black-handled chisel as a screw-
driver! ). This dead man had probably known every wrinkle
in his dear boots—poverty means such intimacy between
a man and his possessions. Yet now his feet, muddy and
swollen and ringed with callouses, bore nakedness without
protest. Andhis boots, shorn of that familiarity which is the
sacred soul of things—incased a thief's irreverent shins.
With a jingle and a splintering screech the cart arrived
at the door of the hut. Old Sergei, followed by the soldiers,
came round the corner of the ruin. One of the soldiers trod
on the dead Russian's hand before he saw it, but after see-
ing it he trod on it again, as if to see if the man would
mind.
'It is a dead Big-nose," all the soldiers told one an-
other.
Old Sergei seemed to come alive when he saw the dead
man. Death was Old Sergei's hobby. "How surprised he
looks!" he said. "The surprise was soon over, though. Only
just lasted long enough to raise his eyebrows. Or one might
say it lasted forever—his eyebrows were never lowered
^
8 fitil
again." Old Sergei sighed. "One forgets/' he said, "that
bodies are so soft in a dangerous world—
softer than cheese
is to the knife. Why do we trust one another so, living in
such soft bodies? Of course we must trust one another; we
dare not remember the hardness of steel or of men's hearts
—being so soft. If we had steel skins, we should dare to
know everything."
Seryozha listened to his father with some interest, clutch-
ing the bosom of his blouse, pinching his chest to feel how
soft his skin was. But he put on the mulish, deliberately
prosaic expression sons generally wear when their fathers
express themselves in a way that seems to the young un-
elderly.
"His boots have been stolen," said Seryozha.
"Oh, it is so ver}^ interesting," said Old Sergei, leaning
eagerly over the dead man, "to think that this experience
cannot escape us. Weshall all, some day, know what it is
to be dead."
"It escaped him," said Seryozha. "The experience must
have been over almost before it began."
"How do you know?"
But Seryozha's interest flagged. He did not really believe
he would ever die. This was why he so often killed things—
birds—beetles—
fishes . . . because he could not imagine
death.
"There are probably more of them," he said, and looked
up the hill. Tlie soldiers were quicker-sighted than he was.
So was his dog. The soldiers pointed out his dog, shoulder
deep in brush, halfway up the hill. The dog, with its ears
strained back, its nose waving, pointed doubtfully at a
couple of gray mounds among the scrub-oaks.
As soon as Old Sergei and his son left the shelter of the
sagging eaves, the rain hammered sharply on their faces and
shoulders. Seryozha's dog, with a skin of wet mud, looking
half its natural size, came down the hill to meet him and
£|J5 9 SliJ
ask about this disquieting marvel of two dead gods. The
dog had not known before that gods could die, but, like
all dogs, it was perfectly open-minded about marvels, and,
having learned its lesson of divine mortality, would not now
have been surprised to see every god in sight fall down dead.
Seryozha had carried two spades all the way, corded across
his back. Halfway up the hill he unstrapped the spades. Old
Sergei selected the site of the three graves.
It was hard work digging, though the northern earth,
baked in summerand frozen in winter, was now, under rain,
at its softest. The Chinese soldiers stood very close, watch-
ing each spadeful eagerly, as though it might disclose gold.
They did not move till Seryozha actually came near to cut-
ting the earth from under their feet. To a Chinese, any
white man doing anything is an absorbing show.
'Td rather be burying one of you," said Seryozha, rudely,
to the smiling corporal. 'Tou wouldn't need so big a hole."
All the soldiers laughed affably.
Old Sergei worked rather weakly with his spade. As he
dug he thought with deliberate pathos of the three dead
men and presently made himself cry. "No doubt," he
sniffed, "they had women they loved, and perhaps little
children, too. Their last thoughts were perhaps of the sun-
shine filtering through the forests of happy Russia—dark
Russian trees in whose shade they wooed their loves. Per-
haps their last thought of all was a rapture—
I have found
my Russia again.. .
."
The dark trees of Russia meant nothing to Seryozha, who
had had a hard-baked dusty north China childhood. He
did not even think of it as exile. The word exile to him was
just a whining plaint of parents. He grunted indifferently
as he dug, the sweat dripping from his yellow forelock.
"You young things have no hearts," continued Old
Sergei, turning over with his spade a few lumps of red earth
and then holding his hand out to enjoy the pathos of its
JiU 10 £|U
senile tremblings. "You have no tears to shed for the dese-
crated earth of Russia that bore you. You have never even
worshiped God in a house of God in company with men
and women of your own race. It is nothing to you that
these men—
no doubt men who feared God and loved His
Son—should lie dead in these rough holes without a priest
to bless them."
"Why don't you bless them yourself, then?" asked
Ser}^ozha, straightening his back. 'Tou know so many
prayers."
"How can I?" exclaimed Old Sergei, shocked. "It would
be entirely improper for me to take a priest's words into my
mouth."
In a silence broken only by the scraping of the spades
and the snifEng of Old Sergei, they finished their digging.
The Chinese watched them, as though in a trance. When,
however, Seryozha took the shoulders of the first of the
three dead men, and Old Sergei prepared to fumble with
the feet, the Chinese corporal said, "Let's make sure there's
no money on them. It is a pity to bury money."
"You wicked man," croaked Old Sergei passionately. "It
is much more of a pity to rob the dead. WeRussians hold
our dead sacred. We shall bury these men with what few
poor treasures they have."
But Seryozha laid the body down and looked at his
father. "If we don't search them," he said in Russian, "these
coolies will wait till we have gone and then come back and
open the graves. Better to show them there is nothing."
"Oi! oi! Sacrilege!" cried Old Sergei. But, seeing Seryozha
hesitate, he added on a firmer note, "Oi! Sacrilege!. . .
but have it your own way. You young people always think
you know best. You have no hearts. I shall certainly not
be a party to your robbery of the dead." He walked away
a few steps and, with his back to his son, bent down and
flJJ 11 fflj
fumbled with the boughs of a dark pink azalea. As he did
so he recaptured his checked tearful mood by imagining
the little weeping children of the dead men picking flowers
in the darling forests of Russia.
The Chinese came and stood very close to Seryozha as
he knelt down beside one dead man, then another, then
the last. There was no money in their pockets; a cross or
amulet had been torn from the neck of one. Their clothes
were in rags, their fur caps were motheaten. "Ours are bet-
ter/' said the soldiers, laughing. The boots of all three
Russians had already been taken by their assailants. In the
pocket of one Seryozha found a bill for a bicycle; another
wore a ring that might be gold of poor quality on his little
finger. The ring was tightly fixed and for one moment
Seryozha sweated cold as the Chinese corporal's hand went
helpfully toward his dagger. But a cracking wrench drew
the ring off the wet finger at last. They all looked at it. It
was very light and was decorated with two little thin joined
hearts. "It is the price of a ride in our cart," said the cor-
poral, laughing winningly into Seryozha's face. He took it
from Seryozha's palm as though to examine it, and slipped
it into his wallet.
Seryozha stood a moment, thinking, and then called to
his father, "The sacrilege is all over now."
"Oi! oi! Heartless, heartless!" cried Old Sergei, coming
fussily back.
Between them, father and son lifted the first man into
his grave, and Old Sergei, crying still, was going to shovel
the earth into the trench when Seryozha seized his arm.
"Ah no, no, no!" cried Seryozha.
His father gaped at him. "What then? Are we not bury-
ing the poor fellow?"
Seryozha said, "But not earth on his face. . .
." Then,
recollecting himself, the boy laughed sheepishly. "Oh, it
JJS 12 JiJS
was just an idea. . .
." He felt that their faces were their
vanity, somehow, and the mud was so ugly.. . . "Let's put
leaves on his face. . . . Let's put flowers on the poor
fool. . . r
There were plenty of flowers. They heaped heads of pink
azaleas, purple scabeus, poppies, big blue daisies, scarlet
lilies, leaves of scrub-oak, on the dead man's vanity. Seryozha
was very much ashamed of his outburst. He giggled nerv-
ously several times, trying to think of something cynical
and grown-up to say, to cover his childish mistake.
"Now ril chant his blessing," he said, impudently. "Fm
no priest, but what of it—he was no Christian, perhaps.
Good-by, little brother, go and search the sky for a heaven.
I can climb a tree without a ladder, so you can reach your
sky without a prayer. Fll drink your health, little brother, in
Japanese whisky, next time I can afford it. . .
." He said it
in so solemn a tone that the Chinese were rather impressed.
"That is a Big-nose prayer," said one soldier. But, watching
the burial of the other two, they were rather disappointed.
Over the second Seryozha chanted only, "To our next meet-
ing, brother," and over the third, "Oi! to sleep with you,"
as he patted the last spadeful down.
"It is all sacrilege," said Old Sergei, who was rather afraid
of his son in this boisterous mood. "Do go away for a little
while, Seryozha, and take these Chinese pigs away, while
I say a real fellow-Christian's prayer for their peace."
He bowed his head and Seryozha wandered away with his
dog. Near the road was an ants'-nest and Seryozha scratched
at it with his boot, and at once forgot everything else.
Things in little always delighted him—the reflection in a
convex mirror, a knight among his father's chessmen, a
sprig of parsley stuck on his fish pie, like an oak tree on a
crag—
all such small perfect reminders of ordinary unwieldy
things could hold his charmed attention. And he still se-
cretly enjoyed playing with the missionary children because
623 13 £i2J
he so much enjoyed building their wooden blocks into elab-
orate houses. Although he was eighteen years old, it was
difficult for him not to lose his temper when an uncouth
infant missionary kicked down a careful villa in which every
staircase led to somewhere and there was a chimney to
every room. So he liked to think of an ants'-nest as a nest
of little tiny Seryozhas—
a convex mirror set in the red
earth.
When he first touched the nest a sort of shivering skin
of swarming ants suddenly spread over it, but after a few
seconds' panic, every ant remembered its duty, like a good
sailor in a shipwreck, and went to its appointed place—
to
fetch an egg^ to warn its queen, to guard the stores, to re-
open a ruined doorway.. . . Supposing there was a dogs'
nest, thought Seryozha, run on these lines, how stuffy and
cheerful and inefficient! ... Or a lions' nest, how slinky
and undemocratic! ... Or a man's nest, how restful and
easy for poor men to be little bits of something ready-made,
instead of worried creators—
to owe allegiance to a cold
queen instead of to a fussy old father and mother! ...
The rain swept in windy waves down the valley. Seryo-
zha's cap, which had been made by his mother from an old
cloth dress of her own, became so wet that the pasteboard
that ingeniously stiffened the peak lost its courage and
sagged down over Seryozha's eyes. He was a mildly vain
boy and, on removing the cap to try and make it more
worthy of him, was disgusted to find that the color was
running. He took his handkerchief from the cap to wipe a
navy-blue tear from his brow, and as he did so a twenty-sen
note fluttered from a secret place in the cap. The Chinese
corporal, who had just come up, was teasing the ants into
a new dazzle of frenzied movement. The corporal and
Seryozha watched the little piece of paper money flutter
down on to the ants'-nest. There for a moment it stirred
and turned strangely, floating on the eddy of ants beneath
!lll3 14 iliJJ
it, and then the rain soaked, flattened, and weighed it
down. Seryozha laughed and the corporal laughed. Seryo-
zha picked up the note, folded it, and replaced it in the
lining of his cap.
"Big-noses keep their money on the tops of their heads,"
said the corporal merrily to his subordinates.
Andas Seryozha tossed back his wet yellow flap of hair to
cover it with his cap, he met the corporal's eye and instantly
knew that the Chinese was thinking, "We never looked in
the dead Russians' caps for money.. .
."
Old Sergei came up, murmuring something about im-
mortality. Hehad always loved strangers, and detached him-
self querulously from people with a claim on him. Nowhe
had been imagining the lonely death and the lonely awaken-
ing of the three Russians; if they had sought his sympathy
when alive, he would have withheld it. Hewas kinder to lost
dogs than to his wife, and his own son had never seemed to
him to come under that touching heading that so often
brought tears to his eyes—"Helpless Little Child. . .
."
"We must be going home," he said. "I shall in any case
have an attack of rheumatism after this, but every additional
hour spent in this downpour will aggravate it."
"These soldiers mean to search the graves again for
money," said Seryozha.
"Impossible—impossible!" cried Old Sergei tremulous
once more. "They watched us bury them. They know our
friends were poor like ourselves. . .
."
"They know something else now," said Seryozha. "Let's
pretend to go away, and turn back at the pass to see if they
have really gone." Nowthat the dead men were out of sight,
Seryozha did not really very much care whether they were
disturbed or not.
The father and son said a polite good-by to the soldiers
and set their cramped faces against the rainy wind that
swept down the pass. They reached the corner and, before
lllllj 15 flffl
rounding it, stood a moment and looked back. The soldiers,
wilting limply under the eaves of the shed, were looking
after the retreating Russians, the distant white points of
their faces boring like little gimlets through the intervening
air.
"Certainly they seem to be waiting for us to go," said Old
Sergei. 'The swine! . . . Oi! I am so tired of wicked men."
"I am so tired of mywet skin," said Seryozha. "Let's pre-
tend we never suspected the soldiers. Let's pretend they all
went away in their cart and are safely out of sight. Let's go
home."
Old Sergei cautiously considered this proposal. He began
pretending to go home. The road home slowly diminished,
slowly drew in its vistas inside his imagination. In infinitesi-
mal jerks the new painted temple beside the home river cut
sharply into his mind's sight. The ferry made its usual un-
likely arrival, after apparently proceeding for ten minutes in
the wrong direction; imaginary caravan ponies, cramped in
the familiar rickety old barge of his vision, drooled down the
necks of their human fellow-passengers; Korean women
squatted in the bows in the middle of their semi-deflated
balloon skirts; every one twittered in his dream ear; here
was home. . . . Here was home—the low door, the win-
dow cut neatly but unnaturally like a surgical incision, the
noise of Anna letting something metallic fall in the back
yard.. . .
Seryozha's mind, as though following a secret groove, ran
more quickly home—
even more quickly than his dog, who
was already several miles nearer supper than they were. Ser-
yozha, who had arrived at the age when one is nothing but a
brittle baby incased in a glass shell of cautious maturity, was
already seeing himself walking nobly up the village street,
being looked at with admiration by the Chinese boy neigh-
bors—especially by little Hu-Lien—damn his eyes.. . .
"There goes the Young Big-nose," thought Seryozha on
ffiS 16 UJJ
their behalf, "who has been out on an adventure connected
with a battle. . .
/' Not that Chinese boys would ever ad-
mire a friend on such grounds, but poor Seryozha had no
juniors of his own race to impress, so he had to make it all
up. And once you begin to make things up, you might as
well flatter as blame yourself.
"No," said Old Sergei. "We will, on second thoughts, not
go home at once. Wewill not desert our friends. Wewill sit
here for five minutes, hidden in the shelter of this rock, and
then look back to see if the soldiers are safely gone."
They sat flattened like lizards against the rock, picking
their teeth, though there was nothing much to pick, break-
fast being six hours past.
"If I climb up that bank instead of back on to the road,"
said Seryozha. "I can look straight down the slope on to the
graves."
"I will chmb, too," said Old Sergei, who never liked to
risk letting any one else see something first. News, however
distressing, was far better to give than to receive.
They combed the wet scrub-oaks and the matted flowery
grass with their legs as they climbed the short slope. Two
hundred feet below them, the doubled up forms of six sol-
diers were knotted round one of the graves. The other grave
was an inflamed scar of newly-turned mud.
"Yah!" screamed Old Sergei, and threw himself down the
slope, his lank limp arms and legs flying. "You God-damned
swine! You sacrilegious sons of tortoises! . .
."
Seryozha bounced after him, his stomach aching sharply
with pleasurable excitement. His thoughts were joggled up
and down like medicine in a bottle. Father and son were
upon the soldiers as though in one windy stride. Seryozha's
spade came in flat and glorious contact with fleeing Chinese
buttocks. One soldier sprawled with his face in the mud; he
twisted himself into a sitting position and fanned the air
with futile arms, bellowing curses, his mouth a red hole in a
flJl 17 £53
maskof mud. OldSergei, craninghis longneck, stampinghis
silly old foot, stood over the opened grave like a flamingo
defending its nest, creaking out curses in Russian and Chi-
nese. The corporal, with a bloody nose, trying to feel 5afe
and comparatively authoritative at a distance of about thirty
feet, clung to the frail hut as though ready to whisk it before
him as a shield should he be attacked again, and bawled to
his men to come away. This they were only too anxious to
do, poor things, only they dared not turn their backs for a
second on the Russians.
'Tou shall hear of this again, dogs," shouted the corporal.
"Have you forgotten that you are nothing but filthy Rus-
sians—homeless nobodies? . . , Our general shall teach
you your place.. .
." His nose began to bleed afresh and he
buried it in a bunch of sunflower leaves, shouting in a muf-
fled voice to his men to retreat. This they did, assembling
with anxious, crooked gait round their cart. How different
were the voices that shocked the horses awake from the
merry yodelings that gave the poor beasts license to graze an
hour ago. Aconfused grumble and united hiccough pf oaths
accompanied the mounting of the cart. One soldier, crying
shrilly and ostentatiously, lay on his face in the straw of the
cart, rubbing his bruised behind.
"Ha-ha!" yelled Seryozha, brandishing his spade trium-
phantly in their direction as they drove away, but all the
same, he felt a little pang when he remembered their peace-
ful, ingenuous jocosity of only a few short minutes before.
He felt, somehow, as though he had taken a folly too seri-
ously.
"Nothing is sacred to these swine—nothing," chattered
Old Sergei. "Even Russian gentlemen. . . heroes, who
have died in some paltry Chinese cause. . .
."
"Aw, shut up, father!" said Seryozha. "Nothing's so very
sacred as all that to any of us, really. . . nothing except
our vanity.. .
."
fiB IS jSiliJ
He met the quiet, anxious, opaque eyes of the disturbed
dead Russian, leaning with shrugged shoulders out of his
new grave. Sewozha caught his breath. "And when we're
dead, our vanity's dead too, damn it all, so—what of it?"
CHAPTER TWO
Mrs. Butters's sinless smile was bracketed a little on one
side, like a parenthesis. Even her nose \\as smiling kindly.
Yet she was thinking: "These Russians are really not much
use. That hemstitching doesn't look good." Howe\er the
baby whom the hemstitching would adorn would not be
her first. First babies need first-rate hemstitching. But Mrs.
Butters had had four and the baby she expected in October
was only having a newoutfit madebecause its four predeces-
sors had fairly worn the original set to rags.
Mrs. Butters looked over Anna's shoulder. "My dear Mrs.
Malinin, howquick you work! It's just wonderful! . .
."
"Quick but not good/' said Anna in a wistfully challeng-
ing voice.
"I think you're doing fine;" said Mrs. Butters firmly, and
then she faltered: "But—my dear—why have you drawn
the threads out of this hem? That's the side hem. Wedon't
want hemstitching up the side hem."
"Oi! oi!" cried Anna. "Is that the side hem? Oil oil"
"It doesn't matter/' said Mrs. Butters, and then with
gathering conviction: "It really doesnt matter, Mrs. Ma-
linin. It will hardly show."
613 20 flJJ
"It will show/* said Anna. "It will show very bad indeed.
Oi! what a stupid old woman I am! Can I not weave the
threads in again, very watchfully?"
"No, really, Mrs. Malinin; that wouldlook worse still. No,
it will be all right. After all, why shouldn't the side hem be
hemstitched? Quite original. Don't think of it again."
Anna went on sewing in silence for a moment, bending
her fat abashed face over her work. Turning remorse in her
tender heart like a sword in a wound, she imagined Mrs.
Butters secretly broken with disappointment about the
spoiled side hem. In her own affairs Anna was an optimist;
disappointment never dwelt long with her. Butshe imagined
the hopes of others as being much more susceptible to
blight. She saw herself as an iron Anna living in a world of
glass. "She will always see that stupid hem as she shows the
baby to her missionary friends," thought Anna, violently.
"She will be able to see nothing else. It will spoil the baby
for her completely. I am not worth the money I take from
these people. I will refuse today's two yen."
Mrs. Butters, seeing that Annalooked sad, hastened to tell
a funny story. "Did I tell you what Betty, my quaint second
girlie, said after her last Saturday-night bath, Mrs. Malinin?
She said, 'Mummy, I'd like to say drace now—I'd like to
"
say Thank Dod for a dood hot bath.'
"Having done the stupidity now," said Anna. "Would it
perhaps make it better to do another stupidity to match on
the other side?" Then she noticed that she was once more
disappointing Mrs. Butters, and added, "Ah—she said
that? But she is funny—
your little Betti!" She gave a bois-
terous if belated laugh.
"She is a very sensitive, queer child," said Mrs. Butters.
"She cried when the goat died yesterday. And it wasn't be-
cause she liked the milk, either. She said to me, 'Mummy,I
"
did love dat doatie.'
"My husband also cries for such things," said Anna. "He
82 21 Slfl
cried when the cat broke its neck. Weall cried a little, but
my husband most loudly. He is bhnd, you see, so he must
value creatures that he can feel, now that he has lost the
seeing of them. When he could see, he did not like crea-
tures. So now we have an orphan kitten, Mrs. Butters, and
you an orphan kid."
"An orphan kid! Haven't you a quaint way of saying
things, Mrs. Malinin! But your English is wonderful, Fm
sure. How did you learn such good English?"
"I was for many years a governess in England. I lived in a
part of London called Kensington. The little girl I taught
was also called Betti; her mother was called Honorable Mrs.
Atkinson and wore always pink silk underx^ests of the most
expensive kind. I taught Betti French and German, but I
also learned a pretty good deal of English. Howcheerfully I
rememberLondon! Climbing up the colored stairs on to the
roofs of buses, I remember, and sitting on the right-hand
comer seat, because in London all carriages drive on the left
side, and therefore, sitting so, one may look down on the
tops of all carriages going in—out—in—
run—
stop—in
—
out, like the ice in our rivers here in April. Mylittle pupil,
Betti, had a dog in London and always that dog catched
buses before us, and climbed up skippingly to the roof, and
sat on the right-hand corner seat. . . . Even if strangers
were already there, that dog sat down on the strangers! Ha-
ha-ha! A clever dog, called Paddy. Oh, the Kensington Gar-
dens, Mrs. Butters! Crocuses—such things we never have in
this damn country—purple some and white others—
all in
the green grass. Oh, pretty!. . . There is a lake in the Ken-
sington Gardens, where Betti and I sailed a boat; sometimes
manyhours that boat went round foolishly in the middle of
the lake, and we wait on the shore, saying, well, give her five
more minutes . . . but sometimes—oh, the wind there!
hairs, boats, skirts, dog's fur, all blowing one way, and sun—
cloud—
sun—cloud—running across that so rough pond.
fliil 22 fiTil
. . . And once a duck bit our boat—she was called Die
Lustige WitweJ'
'Tou Russians are such wonderful linguists/' murmured
Mrs. Butters. "And I suppose you married then and had a
little boy of your own to teach."
'Tes I marry before Seryozha comes, because I think it is
good for a child to have a father—
even a father like my old
husband. So I marry. We go back to Russia. I have taught
Seryozha English as good as I can." Anna sighed gustily. A
few hairpins dropped out as she sighed. '1 thought English
is the most useful business language in China—and now
China is our country, since there is no Russia any more. But
he will never be a business man, Seryozha. His father had no
business gifts. Also Ser}ozha was born when I was too old. I
"
was thirty-six. If a woman over thirty bears a child
Mrs. Butters was a little puzzled by parts of this sentence.
Also she preferred the actual bearing of babies to talking
about it.
"But Mr. Malinin must have some business gifts. That
little shop flourished well, before his misfortune, didn't it?"
"It did not," said Anna, with a bursting laugh. "Nothing
that myfamily does is ever flourishing. Somehow we always
bought too much of what nobody wanted and none of what
all customers would be asking for. Wehad much scent last
year, and only two Japanese ladies ever bought—each one
small bottle at reduced price. They smell of it always—
it is
never finished. They came in the shop stinking of our scent
and asked for German camera films, which we have not. It
is true my husband was—how do you say?—compradore?
to the Tao-yin for some years, he has buyed for him his for-
eign goods—woolens, wines, jewels—but he has madevery
many mistakes, and after that Tao-yin has been dead, the
new one wants not my blunderous old man's help.. . .
Then this new Tao-yin is murdered (do you know people
have said it is the two sons of his not-loved concubine have
ffl 23 ffl
murdered him?) ; then comes this modern chap who wants
no old men anywhere. He buys his foreign goods through
our nephew, Andrei Mahnin. Our nephew is very trusted by
the now Tao-yin. It is Andryusha who has helped my old
husband in our trouble by entreating for him. Buthe cannot
entreat our business back. Pitying is kind, yes? but it is not
business. Well, it doesn't matter. My husband has never
been good business fellow; now it does not matter, for we
have no more business to blunder with."
"But surely," said Mrs. Butters, 'with your nephew's help
you can get some compensation for the looting of your shop.
They had no right to do it."
"Every one has the right to do all things to Russians
now," said Anna. "Besides, my husband was certainly very
silly. Hebeat some Chinese soldiers, and so angered them."
Mrs. Butters tried for a moment, with confused mission-
ary charity, to imagine Old Sergei beating anybody. "I sup-
pose he did it in righteous anger," she said, hopefully.
"Oi! He did it in foolishness," said Anna. "There is no
need for so much defending of dead Russian heroes. Once
a man is dead he is dead and has not muchhonor to defend.
But myhusband runs always after dead men; he beat these
Chinese for interrupting the peace of Russian dead soldiers
—
so the Chinese interrupt the peace of his alive wife and
son. Butalive ones don't matter to myhusband. Heis a man
full of folly."
"Very good of him, I'm sure," said Mrs. Butters vaguely,
though she did not really think Old Sergei good. He had
some inconvenient foreign religion which inspired him to
talk about God at missionary high-tea parties almost before
the canned clam chowder was on the table, but he never
came to church. "He did suffer for his championship of his
dead friends, didn't he, for I suppose in the tussle he got a
blow on the head which finally madehim go blind. . .
."
"His head was not in the least blowed," said Anna in a
Hffi 24 ffij
high, rather exasperated voice. "He came home very happy,
smacking his chest for pride, saying, 'I have beaten these
sacrilegious openers of heroes' graves—
I have beaten them
weir . . . and then some Russian man came and told us
that the soldiers would come and beat him or perhaps put
him in prison, for revenge. So my husband went away
quickly, out of fear. Fortunately, it was good weather—in
wet weather he becomes stiff and painful in his sitting down
and must not go out, but this time the weather was dry and
the poor silly old manw^ent forty li to the house of a Korean
cow-grower who is his friend. When he was gone the Chi-
nese soldiers come to our house and ask where he is. My
Ser)Ozha knows Chinese people well—better than his fa-
ther or I know them—and he can make Chinese laugh. So
the soldiers laugh and go away. But in the night they come
back, and they break the shutters and the door and took
away all the tobacco and then the tins of vegetables and
fruits, and the sweets and the cheap jewelry, but the bottles
of hairwash and medicine and scent they broke after they
had tasted. They took also eighty yen worth of cotton stuffs.
Theletter-paper they make dirty by treading on it, they spill
the ink over the books, and the complexion oils they throw
through the window. I would have beaten them myself.
They were little soldiers and my hands are hard—
I would
rather use myhands to protect myproperties than to protect
dead men—but Seryozha would not let me. All the time he
stood in the shop door and pretended to say different ideas
what to do next, and pretended to remind them of goods
they were forgetting—but really he tried, by talk, to pull
their notice away from things more precious. He is a clever
boy, Seryozha."
"But it was very wrong of the soldiers," said Mrs. Butters.
"Somebody ought to do something about it. Surely you can
get them punished and claim some redress."
fiifl 25 ffll
"We are Russians/' said Anna with an unintentionally
loud snort. She had her limbs, her larynx, her stomach, her
imagination under poor control, and often found herself do-
ing things that she had not intended. 'In the morning Ser-
yozha and I went to the magistrate's yamen and complained,
but we only saw an under man, and he said he will inquire
of the colonel and ask to have the soldiers punished, and
he would send our askings for the price of our goods to Kirin
to be thought about. But there will be little thinking, I
think, and no paying. Especially since the Tao-yin whoknew
myhusband, is now dead. The new Tao-yin knows nothing
about our complaints. My husband's nephew, Andrei Ma-
linin, who is a friend of the new Tao-yin and builds bridges
and trains horses and buys automobiles for him, said to us,
'Let Dyadya come back now to his home; no one will hurt
him now. But let him ask no more for compensations.' So
myhusband cameback."
"But I don't understand," said Mrs. Butters, who was
saving up all this to tell her husband in the evening, en-
titled, "The Truth of the Malinin Story." "What made Mr.
Malinin go blind so suddenly, if the soldiers did not hurt
him?"
"God alone understands why he went blind," said Anna.
"Myhusband, poor old man, thinks he understands too, but
all he says is folly. That same day he came home he began
again his follies. I had a good dinner for him that day—
bortsch and a fine fat chicken—and when my husband
saw, he said to Seryozha, 'Run now and fetch Alyosha; he
loves good food and has no money.' But that was a very
strange thing, Mrs. Butters, for myhusband does not often
love poor men—while they live. Seryozha went to the house
of Alexei Vassileievitch, and there he was—the saddle-
maker, you remember?—making bets with all his friends
that he could drink more beer more fastly than they could
l!lll3 26 fiJJ
drink. Perhaps you remember hearing—
it was a very
hot day, and Alexei Vassileievitch fell down dead"
'1 remember/' said Mrs. Butters, shuddering. "Such a
terrible judgment—
a terrible death—with his sins upon
him."
"Our sins are always upon us/' said Anna. "Theyare more
tight buttoned upon us than our clothes. Whenever we die
—drinking at the first supper or the Last Supper—our sins
are always upon us, Mrs. Butters. I did not like Alyosha the
saddlemaker; he bought a floor mat from us and would not
paybecause it hada small smell. I am not sorrowing because
of his death but only because of the more trouble it brought
upon us. Seryozha was a long time away, watching the
drinking game, and at home myold husband would not eat,
though the soup became cold—waiting, waiting—for a
poor man he never thinks of feeding in his life before. So
Seryozha comes running to say, 'Alyosha is dead.' 'Sht boy,'
I say, 'shsht—he will hear,' but myold husband has already
heard. Oi, what folly begins at once. My husband runs to
Alyosha's house and I runs after him—though the dinner
would spoil and spoil—and there were Chinese policemen
asking and examining in Alyosha's house and Alyosha him-
self lying on the floor with his tongue out all crookedly and
a bluely red swollen face. My old Sergei pushed away the
police, saying, this man is of myrace, he is mine to bury. Oi!
what a curse are these drunkard dead that they must be
made so honorable. Two friends helped to carry Alexei Vas-
sileievitch's body to our house; the Chinese police did not
stop them, though they talked much, thinking perhaps Alyo-
sha had been murdered, so they followed behind, talking
angrily to my old fool, saying, 'Always you interfere with
Chinese police officers doing their duties.' . . . Myhusband
madeAlyosha be carried in our house and all mynice dinner
be swept off the table and the body be laid down on it, all
red and dirty and dead, and no friend of ours, Mrs. Butters
£lil3 27 O
—
Just a drunken saddlemaker, God forgive him. I tell you
he smelled of leather and horses, but he was on our table,
like a joint of meat that was no meat, so all day we ate our
meals on the bed, though the goodness of the dinner I had
prepared was all gone. And in the evening my husband
buried that poor damn man in the open green space behind
our house—
after dark, that thieves might not know. Be-
cause he had it fixed in his thoughts that the Chinese would
again try to open the grave. So all night long he lay on a
blanket outside, against the wall of our yard. Three times—
four times—
five times—
I went out and said, 'Come in,
stupid man; you will have rheumatism again; tomorrow you
will not have power to bend,' but he is stubborn like a goat,
and early in the morning, as the sun rose up, I heard him
scream, high like a child—
like this—
'E-e-e-e! Oi! I am
blind!' ... It was when he felt the sun on his cheek, then
he knew it was day and he was blind. He says it was the
sparrows' droppings from the top of the wall, but the Japa-
nese doctor says no, it cannot be. The Japanese doctor says
it is a nervous—
a hysteric. I do not know—but spanows
I do not blame. So nowmypoor old fool he sits there all the
time sorrowing. There is no amusement or interest he can
do—only feel with his hands things that are alive, and that
makes him cry, but he always loves being made to cry. He
was in love with dead men when he could see
—but now
that he mustsit at home, the dead do not cometo him. . . .
So now he cries over alive things that he can feel—
it is all
the same really—he only seeks tears. He feels Seryozha's
ankle, and the cat, and puppies, and Seryozha found some
little small young birds in a nest—anything that moves he
must feel, that he may think the sad thoughts he wants to
think."
'It is all very sad," said Mrs. Butters. *'lt must make life
very difficult for you, Mrs. Malinin."
"Oh, not so difficult. Seryozha works—not every day, but
O 28 fi?A
sometimes—
on the new bridge. Our nephew, Andrei Ma-
hnin—that engineer who I told you is friend to the new
Tao-yin—he helps us a little. I think he arranged, too, so
that my old husband was not attacked by the Chinese po-
licemen for taking Alyosha's body. And I come and sew—
oi! but how bad I sew—for you and the other mission
families."
"You certainly have known a great deal of trouble," said
Mrs. Butters, who had been punctuating the story with
clickings of her tongue and low abstracted moans. Then she
remembered the Christian duty of reassurance. "Oh, but I
think you sew very nicely."
"Hemstitching all down the baby's ribs—oh yes—
very
nice," mourned Anna. The imperfection made a sore place
in her self-esteem. "How easy it would have been to think
before—not to pull those threads out. Never, never do I
think before. All my life is full of being sorry for not think-
ing before."
"Oh, please don't worry yourself," said Mrs. Butters, al-
most irritated by this extreme remorse.
One of the Butters children came in, talking in the ag-
grieved whine peculiar to the children of missionaries.
"Mah-mah!"
"It is so difficult for our finite minds to understand," said
Mrs. Butters, "the omnipotent wisdom which sometimes
"
sees fit
"Mah-mah."
"
—to load so many grievous burdens on one
"Mah-mah."
"
—shrinking sinner's shoulders. All we can do is
"Mah-mah."
"
"—to feel that behind it all shines
"Mah-mah."
"
"—a love that
"
"
!fi9 29 AM
"Mah-mah."
"Surely your child wishes to speak with you/' said Anna,
with difficulty restraining her hands from boxing the ears of
both mother and child. A conflict of noises could always
crack her temper as, it is said, some discords can crack a glass.
"Mah-mah's busy, lovey," said Mrs. Butters. "What does
mah-mah's lovey want to ask mah-mah?"
"Mah-mah ... it won't eat no ackles."
"Won't it, darling?. . . And it seems to me, Mrs. Ma-
"
linin, that if
"But, mah-mah."
"
—we could only learn to cast all our troub"
"Mah-mah."
"
bles on that great heart that is so ready to bear
"
them, we could turn and face the world with a perfect
"Mah-mah."
"Your child seems still to have some matter on its mind,"
said Anna between ground teeth.
"What is it, mah-mah's prettybird?"
"Mah-mah, it won't eat no ackles."
"No, darling, just fancy that! . . . And another thing,
Mrs. Malinin"
"But, mah-mah."
"For God's sake, child," said Anna, hoarsely, glaring at
the child, "what will not eat what.^"
Mrs. Butters put a protective arm round her child and
directed a reproachful glance toward Anna. "Tliese foreign-
ers," she thought. "Even quite nice foreigners... so dif-
ferent. ..."
"Betty is talking of the little kid," she said gently. "The
mother goat—we call her Nannie—died yesterday—
didn't she, loveybird? Mah-mah's loveybird's poor Nannie
doatie went to heaven, and we are wondering if we can rear
the kid. It is so difficult to make it take the bottle."
na 30 fljj
"And what has your child been giving it?"
"What has mah-mah's Bettybird been giving poor Nan-
nie doatie's nitty tiddy to nyum-nyum?"
"Ackles, but it won't eat no ackles, mah-mah."
"Oh, she doesn't know any better, of course; she's been
trying to make the poor httle creature eat apples. Ackles^
she calls them. . .
."
"Mah-mah, I opened the tiddie's moufie, and I pushed
little bits of ackle down wiv my finger, and"
"For God's sake!" shouted Anna, springing to her feet
and knocking down her chair. "Is the child altogether with-
"
out sense? Can it be possible
"Oh, Mrs. Malinin, she's just a wee thing—only six. How
should she know?"
"Mrs. Butters, when I was five my mother and I used to
bring up with our hands all the delicate lambs and calves. I
could milk good long before that, and when I was seven I
have helped my father's groom to accoucher my mare of a
dead colt. All nature's ways were known by me as they
should be by any child who lives in the country and is not
"
blind or imbecile
"Mah-mah's own Bettylove must run away now," said
Mrs. Butters. "And better not give nitty tiddy any more
ackles just now, lovey."
Mrs. Butters, free of Betty's innocent presence, breathed
several deep forgiving breaths through her nose before over-
coming her indignation at Anna's vehemence and vulgarity.
"I had no idea you were such a farmer, dear Mrs. Malinin,"
she said, folding up her sewing as a sign of mild dismissal.
There was only just a trace of reproachful emphasis on the
word farmer. "I believe I shall have to give you the little kid
to rear. Evidently you know more about it than we do."
Anna was crossing the room at the moment to fetch a
reel of cotton from a drawer. And, although she was fifty-
four years old, when she heard that the kid might be hers
she leaped into the air and smacked the top of her head.
The floor shook. "Oh, how I should enjoy that! How I
should enjoy it! And my poor old man to have a kid to
stroke and a kid's heart to feel beating—most joyfully I ac-
cept, Mrs. Butters, most joyfully.. .
/'
M m
•T*T0T*1 /•?••¥•
m/s/m/mmA
•T*T*T*TfT*T V*T«Y*V«Y*V« WW
CHAPTER THREE
Seryozha saw his mother coming home hugging a large
bleating linen basket to her stomach.
Seryozha, born in an air too rarefied for most illusions, re-
tained only one—the illusion of his own dignity. Hedid not
mind what strange, boisterous, misunderstood activities the
outer Ser^'ozha took part in, as long as the inner Seryozha
could explain to himself these seeming pranks by some
formula of secret though freakish dignity. One has seen a
weighted wooden tumbling toy, knocked down on a flat
surface, preserving its integrity and fulfilling its purpose by
finding, in the end, its own odd balance regardless of the
mockery of the watchers—and only robbed of its birthright
of eccentric equilibrium when the gods themselves fight
against it and overset it on an unfairly tilted plane. So Ser-
yozha, left to himself, could always account to himself for
himself. But outside were parents, gods, insects, landscapes,
animals, machines, and the elements—traitors to young
individual dignity—
all conspiring together unfairly to de-
stroy the balance of valiant dignity.
To lack a camera or a wireless set, to be at home in a
wooden Korean house with little squinting windows and a
I
313 33 filJ
chronic smell, was bad enough, but to see a perspiring
mother coming toward the homecarrying a goat in a clothes-
basket, in the sight of dozens of her less respectable Oriental
neighbors, made Seryozha doubt whether he ever would at-
tain to his rightful place in a world full of the rude laughter
of inferiors. However, though he did not know it, Seryozha
was very fond of his mother and, though she often shamed
him, he very seldom punished her. He was much harsher to
his father, and the same instinct in him that allowed his
mother license to play the fool in her own whole-hearted
hen-like way, resented the poverty of his father's vitality. He
did not mind, for instance, the fact that his mother's large
blousy bun of hair was always coming down, so much as he
minded the way his father cautiously combed four or five
streaks of hair from one ear to the other.
'I've got something new here, Seryozha," said Anna, put-
ting down the basket to push a wisp of hair out of her eyes.
She spilled the kid very gently out on to the living-room
floor. For a moment the little creature did not remember
that it knewhowto stand. It crouched on the floor, its awk-
ward pale legs crumpled under its body, its neck stretched,
its pinched mouth open to utter an almost voiceless bleat.
Seryozha's grievance against his mother was overlaid for
the moment by his pleasure in the color of the kid. Things
that were pale below and colored above always looked dra-
matic and beautiful to his eye, as though he had some secret
arctic memory of light growing from a low seed of moon.
Japanese orchards of young fruit-trees with trunks painted
white; great trees illuminated by a bonfire till they looked
like cardboard trees towering over footlights; young horses
with milky pale fur on legs and stomach darkening to shin-
ing russet along the upper ribs and back; young girls with
light stockings and skirts and colored jackets—perhaps he
felt a sort of kinship of pantomime youth with these foot-
light schernes of upslanting color.
m 34 m
Hewatched the kid and said nothing of his pleasure, how-
ever, and underneath his pleasure the feeling of soreness
persisted. He knew obscurely that something in his mind
was sore; he had forgotten what had wounded him; he did
not know that the sore place was his vanity, bruised by his
mother's lack of self-respect. Vanity is so reluctant to iden-
tify itself—yet it always is hurt vanity that gives that sense
of live yet nameless tragedy.
Anna, having dipped a piece of clean rag in milk, was
holding it to the kid's mouth.
"Ah-yah-yah!" sang Seryozha, loudly, feeling he was
achieving something by thwarting his mother. The kid, star-
tled, recoiled from the offered drop.
"Be quiet, child!" cried Anna, jolted into anger by the
check in her breathless experiment. Her forehead sweated a
little and her hand trembled as she stroked once more the
kid's silly lips with the rag.
"Ah-yah-yah!" sang Seryozha, and shook the floor with a
sudden bounce, to make sure.
Tears of anger came into Anna's eyes as she knelt, un-
gainly. She was so very whole-souled in all that she did.
"Curse you, boy"
but she stopped, for the kid was nib-
bling with its lips upon the rag. Success was in sight.
"Ah-yah-yah!" yelled Seryozha, almost against his own in-
clination. Hehad got into a kind of groove of contradiction;
for the moment it was entirely impossible for him to relent.
Anna jumped to her feet, treading on her skirt and tearing
it. She rushed at her son, swinging the linen basket by the
handle, and dealt him a heavy blow which he caught partly
on his defensive elbow and partly on the side of his nose.
Through this tempest of bustle and anger he saw suddenly
the rock-like fact that he was nearly nineteen years old and
that this scene was inconsistent with his essential quiet man-
liness. His nose was scratched now, too.
"Oh, all right," he said, speaking, on purpose, in a foolish
fllll 35 i!iii3
voice as though he had a potato in his mouth, since he was
somehow ashamed to regain his amiabihty too abruptly.
"Get the httle brute fed, then, and get rid of it out of the
house. It smells like the devil."
"What smells?" asked Old Sergei, feeling his way into the
living-room from the yard.
The kid, swept aside and terrified by the bustle and noise,
stood drooping on bent, trembling legs in a far corner, and
gave a faint creaking bleat.
"Alamb?" cried Old Sergei. "Where did you get a lamb?"
"It is a kid," said Anna, crouching once more on the floor
and taking the kid under her arm again with a gentle impa-
tience. "Give me that cup of milk, Seryozha. Mrs. Butters
gave me a kid today, as well as the two yen, for sewing her
baby's dress quite wrongly."
"Why should she give you a kid for making sewing mis-
takes?" asked Old Sergei. "You can't sew; you never could
sew."
Of course, everything he was wearing was sewn by Anna,
but he felt that no stitch of it did either him or her credit.
Almost all the seams either had, or would soon, burst. Anna
never repaired things. She was far cleverer at contriving than
at stitching, and mending was a work she never had time for
until actual nakedness was in sight. She would always prefer
to invent a new cut of trouser, or a new method of fastening
a shoe, to patching existing trousers or replacing old laces.
She would rather have a new kid or puppy every night to
feed, than cook the supper for the same old everyday hus-
band and son.
"You don't really earn a sen with your sewing," said Old
Sergei, "much less a kid. The missionaries only pay you out
of charity, because they know I am blind and cannot sup-
port my wife and child as I used to."
Seryozha made a rude noise.
"So why/' persisted Old Sergei—"why should the mis-
ttil 36 fiift
sionaries be such fools as to give you a kid in addition to
the two yen you don't earn? I don't beheve they did give it
to you."
"Why, here is the kid. Feel it/' said Anna. "How do you
suggest it got here? Did I steal it, do you think?"
"Heaven knows how it got here. Heaven knows what you
will do next. How do I know you didn't steal it? We are
sunk so low that nothing would surprise me. Or perhaps
Mrs. Butters was joking and did not mean to give it to you
at all and you made a mistake, as usual, and walked off with
the creature. WTiy should she give us a smelly kid? We
don't want a kid; we didn't ask for a kid; and it will make a
mess in the house, too. Whata place for a kid—in a gentle-
man's living-room! And, of course no supper prepared, I
am sure, for me and Seryozha.. . . Oh no! the stolen kid
"
must be fed before your husband and son
"Be silent, you horrid old man!" cried Anna, now full of
anger and a diffident panic, because her sensitive conscience
admitted the possibility that Mrs. Butters perhaps had
not meant her offer of the kid to be accepted so literally
and immediately. Anna heard, with her suddenly awakened
mind's ear, her own boisterous voice crying, "Oh, Mrs. But-
ters, most cheerfully I accept.. .
." Too soon—too soon
—and now too late remembered. To remember the sound
of her own voice was almost always, for poor Anna, to hear
a sort of bugle call calling to retreat—and retreat was al-
ways, alas, by then impossible. Every battle was always
fought and lost by the time she heard that dreaded call.
"Take the creature," she said to Seryozha in a broken
voice. "Let it die if you like, or take it back to the mission."
She went out, loaded with sadness, to cook the supper.
Seryozha took the kid and the cup of milk out into the
yard and sat crooning into its winking ear as he held it in his
arms and dipped and redipped the rag. "Yoodle-doodle-doo
. . . yoodle-doodle-dido," he sang in a small falsetto voice
fiJJ 37 filil
which the kid seemed to hke. The breast of Seryozha's
blouse was soon soaked in milk. The kid's yellow cynical
eyes, slotted with vertical irises, were fixed on him as
though it were trying to persuade itself that this was some
eccentric relation of its late mother's.
Old Sergei sat alone in the living-room, his trembling
veined old hands clasping and unclasping limply between
his knees. Annacame to the door, mixing some egg and flour
in a bowl, and said: *'You horrid old man . . . you weari-
some old man . . . running about honoring strangers and
then coming home to break myheart. That kid was given to
me—
/'
it was. . .
"God knows whether it was or not," said Old Sergei, but
under his breath, thus satisfying his honor as a Husband
with a Righteous Grievance without speaking loud enough
to provoke the violence of his wife. Anna sighed petulantly
and noisily and returned to the stove. Old Sergei sat droop-
ing, opening and shutting his blind eyes to remind himself
that he could not see. He laid his hand on his throbbing
throat, for he craved to feel life always under his hand in
order to titillate his fancy about death. He swallowed; his
Adam's apple moved underhis hand, and his vague thoughts
floated round and round the strangeness of life and death.
He was old, he thought; he was not loved. He loved no
one. He felt the breath climbing foolishly up and down the
unsteady shaft that was his body, like an imprisoned bird
never losing hope of escape. Some day the prisoner would
find the loophole and fly from his lips. The sooner the
better, thought Old Sergei—
or rather he thought that he
thought so; life was a curse without serenity. Who could
be serene by Anna's side? He felt as home-sick for serenity
as though he had once enjoyed it. Hebelieved he had left it
behind him in old lost Russia. He believed he would find
it again in heaven, which was the only province of lost
Russia left to him to visit now.
!|JB 38 filiJ
"Todie—
to die—
to die . .
/* whispered Old Sergei, en-
joying the feehng of tears brimming over the quivering skin
of his eye-sockets. He stroked and stroked his too living
throat; in his sightless eyes he saw the sad picture of his
lovelessness. Clasping his hands together, he laid this sad
picture before his God, hoping to soften God's heart by a
prostrate-spirited humility. '1 have sinned, O God," he
thought, for his vanity felt defiled by Anna's reproaches.
'1 have sinned, I am reproached, so let me die. I am cursed;
I am found out... all life is too difficult for me, for I be-
long to a cursed race . . . wretched Russia—exiled and
despoiled—
a dying race
—
a reproach to all the nations of
the earth among whom we are dispersed.. . . Here am I,
a wretched sinner, a reproached sinner, member of a
wretched and reproached race. O God, let me die. It's the
only way to make people sorry for me instead of angry with
me. . .
." He thought of oblivion as a revenge; death, not
penitence, seemed to him the apposite answer to a justified
reproach; he had no courage for penitence. He would refuse
to be anything more responsible than a pitiful memory in
Anna's mind, and in God's. "Let myspirit be taken from me
... let mebe dissolved and become earth. . . . Let me go
into the everlasting place," he implored of his God, as a
man faced by the irritation of shaving on a cold morning
almost decides to go back to bed and sleep the day out.
He was interrupted in this limp ecstasy by hearing Ser-
yozha's peaceful "Yoodle-doodle-doo," outside in the yard.
He had heard it for some time, but it had not come to the
forefront of his attention till now, suddenly, in a pause in
Anna's kitchen clatter.
"Seryozha," called Old Sergei, "bring me that kid."
Ser)'Ozha, whistling very softly between his teeth, brought
the kid, more than half asleep, huddled in a length of sack-
ing, and put it on the floor between his father's feet. Old
Sergei's hands—
tense, as though they expected to find
l!l29 39 1513
something new—stroked the kid's hard httle brow, the
thin ridge of its neck, the harsh hair on its narrow shoulders,
the heaving bulging ribs, the upturned hoofs tipping the
awkwardly kneeling legs.. . . Old Sergei's fingers ran up
and down the sleepy little animal's backbone, as though it
were an ecstatic instrument.
"Seryozha," said Old Sergei, turning his face down toward
the kid as though he could see it, "if I should die . .
."
Emotion checked his speech, and so long was the pause
that Seryozha, who was tapping with his foot the already flat
corpse of a cockroach in cold abstraction, as though it de-
served to die a hundred deaths, was obliged to say, "Oh, non-
sense, papa! There's no reason whyyou should die. . .
/'
"There is every reason," said Old Sergei, feeling a little
baffled as Seryozha began again whistling, almost in a whis-
per, through his teeth—
an unsuitable obbligato to a talk on
death. "No one values my presence here—
still less do I
value it myself. I am a weariness to those around me and to
myself.. .
."
"You don't really think that, papa," said Seryozha. His
father, with some surprise, took this as an affectionate filial
disclaimer of his proposition. Really Seryozha meant his re-
mark quite literally. He knew that his father did not mean
his statement that the necessity for him to remain in the
world was now at an end. "Nobody believes that," thought
Seryozha, "however much they may say so. Papa's world
wouldn't be there if he weren't there. My world wouldn't
if I weren't. This cockroach's isn't, now it's dead. So none
of us really thinks our world can do without us. I'm sure
it had never before occurred to this cockroach that its world
could do without it
—that anybody could wish it dead. Its
vanity was all comfortable inside itself—
it felt valuable.
When it saw my foot coming, it thought—'an unnatural
accident is happening to a noble and unreplaceable cock-
roach—me/' That's what papa thinks." Seryozha scanned
ai 40 flia
his father's rather tiresome face, his leaking eyes, nose,
mouth, dispassionately. 'Toor old ass," thought Seryozha.
"His vanity's a bit uncomfortable, inside him . . . hungry,
perhaps.. .
/'
"Just now I have been praying to die," said Old Sergei.
("Pretty safe," thought his son, arrogantly, "as experience
must have shown him. Funny how old people don't learn
by experience. Only we young people do that.")
"
—and as I prayed I remembered how penniless and
friendless you and your mother would be were I to leave
you. The shop needs a business head, and if I were not here
to talk things over with your cousin Andryusha, God knows
what would happen. Youand your mother do not realize the
value of a business head quietly yet actively in the back-
ground—an asset quite as necessary to a family's prosperity,
I assure you, as all this cadging of goats and hacking of logs.
However, these things are not appreciated until one is dead,
and, as I told you, I have been praying for death."
In order to prove to his wife and son the value of a busi-
ness head, he had prayed to have it chopped off. Old Sergei
had a different vanity every day. Sometimes he changed
twice or thrice a day. Whenhe got up in the morning, Anna
and Seryozha usually gleaned—though too often in a
rebellious spirit—what fancy aspect of his nature he was
displaying for their admiration for the next few hours. Since
four o'clock today he had been, as Seryozha saw, a Business
Man, afflicted with blindness, to be sure, but quietly effec-
tive nevertheless.
"And as I prayed—since even in meditation and worship
my business sense is awake—
I remembered that two hun-
dred rubles I left with Gavril Hitch Isaev at Seoul, to invest
in his hotel, many years ago, at a time when I feared for the
safety of^Chinese banks and decided that Seoul was safer.
He banked the money in his own name, but I have the
receipt. I wrote it and he signed it. I think it is in that
ma 41 aa
volume of Pushkin's poems that props up the short leg of
our bed. You see what it is, Seryozha, to have an orderly
business mind. You would probably never have remembered
that two hundred dollars."
'1 couldn't have remembered it, since I never heard of it
before/' said Seryozha. "And I don't know now whether
you mean dollars or rubles. You say both."
"I mean neither/' said Old Sergei. "Really, Seryozha, you
are not using your mind. What is the currency of Korea?
Yen, of course. Should I be likely to have my savings put
away in a bank in a currency not native to the country in
which the bank does business? Yours is the kind of question
which shows me how ill able to look after your mother you
would be were I to leave you. You should certainly cultivate
a business sense. Now my idea is that you should go on
foot over the mountains to Seoul and fetch that money
from Gavril Hitch."
"Why don't you write and ask him to send it?"
"I did, of course, write to him, some time ago, in the sum-
mer of 1924, I think it was. Isaev did not answer. He is by
no means a business man and I should say hardly knows
how to put pen to paper except just to sign his name. He
is a peasant—
was my brother's gardener before the revolu-
tion, in Vladivostok. A devoted creature, but evidently
deficient in business methods. Since I wrote to him mymind
has been occupied with other matters and I only thought
of the money just now, when praying to die. But, having
once thought of it, I have no difficulty at all in recollecting
every detail of the transaction, and in deciding on the best
and most business-like solution of the problem—which is
that you should walk to Seoul and"
"Why in the world did you give your two hundred yen
to a peasant who could neither read nor write? That wasn't
very business-like, it seems to me."
"Seryozha, you are not using your mind. Surely you can-
flJl 42 filiJ
not expect me to explain all my business dealings to a raw
lad like you, without financial experience of any kind. As a
matter of fact, it was the best thing to do; I was in Seoul
buying stock for the shop, and found that, since the goods
I expected could not be delivered, I had two hundred yen
too much—more than was safe to carry across the robber-
infested Manchurian border. Isaev had had a good position
as coachman to the Japanese bank-manager and was think-
ing of starting a hotel. His savings were banked in the
Chosen Bank. Naturally I gave him my savings, too, to in-
vest with his own until I should ask for them. I dare say
the poor fellow is wondering every day whyI do not return
to claim my money."
"After ten years of wondering every day I should have
thought he might have got a friend who could write to try
and get in touch with you," said Seryozha, sulkily, but his
mind was already, as it were, packing its wits for the journey;
his toes were already throbbing with the starting fever. Every
day in his unpromising life he woke up feeling "perhaps
something great will happen today," and here was some-
thing great—
a lonely, dignified journey, without any
father and mother to be ashamed of at every turn.
Old Sergei straightened his back, and in doing so awoke
the kid, which, after innocently making a little mess on the
floor, tottered on unsteady legs toward Seryozha, who, it
seemed to the kid, gave forth an inviting smell of milk and
mother. Old Sergei did not notice the departure of his toy,
he was so much interested in the deathbed advice he was
determined to give his son before his fount of tears and high
principles should be dried up by the arid discomforts of an
actual deathbed.
"I have a feeling," he said, his words dipping under his
shaking upper lip like chickens escaping under a rabbit-wire
fence, "I have a feeling that this is the last talk weshall have
together, Seryozha.... If, when you return, I should be
O 43 £|J1
already no more, I entreat you, my boy, to be good to your
mother. Remember the dangers she went through for your
"
sake in bearing you
'That wasn't for my sake, papa—she didn't know me
then—
it was for her pleasure and yours that she bore me,"
said Seryozha.
"Let her lie by myside in the grave,*' said Old Sergei, try-
ing to ignore the possibility of an interval of healthy widow-
hood for poor Anna, "as she has lain so many nights by my
side in the big bed."
"Oh, don't worry, papa," said Seryozha, "You'll both of
you live till ninety, I'm sure." Andhe began to whistle softly
through his teeth again.
Tears squeezed between Old Sergei's eyelids as he half-
realized his impotence in imposing his posthumous pathos
on the living. Howcould he force his wife and son to regret
him all their lives? There was no way. There was no love
or loyalty in the world.
"Supper is ready," said Anna, and stood in the doorway,
suddenly thinking of something else, her eyes fixed on a fly
on the wall. She was trying to think what had irritated and
hurt her just before she began cooking the fish pie. Some-
how she craved to identify that scar on her temper. But she
could not trace any thought to its source because the tire-
some wilderness of her old husband's presence kept on
blossoming into silly words that distracted her attention.
To stop him talking she said again, "Supper is ready." But
Old Sergei went on talking. Anna went on thinking. Ser-
yozha went on whistling. Anna caught words.
".
. . and giving to those who are poorer than yourself.
God remembers it even if the ungrateful forget it. He will
."
repay.. .
"An investment only—not a gift," thought Anna, and
stood in abstraction, scratching her head, till the next words
intruded:
laa 44 m
*\
. . sleeping with women, Seryozha. Remember your
Russian blood is a pure sacred inheritance ... an insult to
the land of your fathers to mix your blood with . .
."
'Tor poor Seryozha/' thought Anna, "Russia is unluckily
becoming nothing but that—the land of his fathers—
father—Russia—boring peevish words. And yet the high
Russian fields . .
."
"Supper is ready," she said aloud. Seryozha, goaded by
his empty stomach, got up so abruptly that he knocked his
chair over. But still Old Sergei went on talking—
com-
manding them to stay, with his weak, blind, upraised face.
'\
. . worth your while to earn, as I have earned, the
reputation of a sound man—
a man with a stake in the com-
munity—one who pays what he owes, no more, no
less. . . r
Anna's thought ran off to the little shop on the other
side of the matchwoodpartition she leaned against—
a place
of business closed since the Chinese soldiers' raid, but still
containing a tall pile of unwanted tins of Milkex, two dozen
fancy diaries, four or five dozen celluloid hand mirrors in
pastel shades, a case of comic can-openers in the form of
bulldogs, a hundred or so silk-padded coat-hangers, and a
few other temptations that could not even tempt thieves.
These goods, Anna felt, shone in an idealized form in her
old husband's imagination, and gave him the right, in his
own eyes, to claim a stake in the community.
'\
. . and never was drunk in my life, Seryozha," she
heard. It was true, she knew, the taste of alcohol had always
made him feel sick. "Some young men think that manliness
is found in drunkenness and coarseness and fornication, but
"
there is a truer manliness
"For God's sake!" said Anna. "Supper is ready, I tell
you." As Old Sergei's blind face turned to her, Anna remem-
bered what it was that had offended her: he had suggested,
by accident, what was probably true, that the offer of the
fiJlJ 45 Ml
kid had been accepted more precipitately than Mrs. But-
ters had intended. "Do you want to starve yourself as well
as talk yourself hoarse, you silly old man?" she said,
vehemently.
Old Sergei was conscious of an indecorous anticlimax
to a Dying Man's Advice to His Son. "My son is going on
a journey and I am giving him a few parting words of ad-
vice, since I aman old man and by the time he comes back I
"
may have been called away on the long
"What journey do you mean?"
Old Sergei felt that her horrified question gave him an
opportunity for tragic drama such as he seldom wrested
from his family. "What journey? Why, death, Anna."
"No. I mean what journey is Seryozha taking, idiot?"
said Anna, stamping irritably with both feet.
"Fm going to Seoul," said Seryozha, happily, "to fetch
"
some money that papa forgot
"Forgot, Seryozha!" exclaimed his father. "It is you that
"
forget
"But Seoul is four days' journey by train and road even
when you get to the train," said Anna. "And on foot. . . .
The police in Korea are most dangerous to poor Russians.
"
. . . The bandits on the border
"Oh, that's all quite easy," said Seryozha. "Three weeks'
walking will do it. And Fd like to see the Japanese police-
"
man or the Chinese bandit that
"You will see neither," said Anna. "You will take no such
journey. The idea! . . . Only a couple of imbeciles would
have such an idea. Dancing off alone into nowhere. What
a notion—and you a mere child still! Let us hear no more
of it. Come, must I tell you for the hundredth time that
supper is ready? For God's sake, old man, are you glued to
your chair?"
/MA m
•T«T«T*1 /•T*T»T*
m/m/mmm
,T*T*T«T*T«T*T w T • T tV• Y«Y t Y«
\\W
CHAPTER FOUR
Tatiana Pavlovna Ostapenko and the servant, Katya,
bent side by side over washtubs, looked like a sow and a
hind feeding side by side from one trough. Both wore the
same kind of headkerchief and faded blue cotton bodice and
skirt. But Tatiana bent like some one finding flowers at her
feet, and Katya bent like a bear offering a goblin a ride on its
back.
A young man watched them from the shade of the wide
tree that stood behind the village at the junction of three
footpaths across the barley and bean fields. The young man,
Piotr Gavrilovitch Isaev, almost wished that Tatiana would
never turn round. He knew her face so well and was so
much afraid of it. Yet he whistled—do-mi-do—his old call
to her, and she turned. He knew she would make no gesture
of enthusiasm. She looked at him across fifty yards of shim-
mering evening sunlight for a long momentand then flapped
her hand toward him with an abashed, rather rigid, gesture.
He watched her talk for a minute to Katya as she dried her
hands on her apron. Then Katya went into the house and
Tatiana walked along the raised footpath toward the young
man under the tree. He could see her exquisite pale face,
flffl 47 ffl
her russet hair dragged tightly from her forehead under the
kerchief, her rather sunken hght eyes, now twitching with
nervousness. Twice, as she approached, she smiled, as
though rehearsing a smile—
just a little abrupt delicate grin
—
a tautening and an instant slackening of her cheeks. It
was a smile that seemed to mean nothing but a good inten-
tion, and was obliterated like a duty done. As soon as she
reached him her expression changed like a changing light on
her face, and she said, 'Torgive me, dear Piotr Gavrilovitch.
I have forgotten something; I must go back to the washing
for a minute." She turned away from him at once andbegan
walking back along the footpath, as a lady-bird hurrying
along a leaf, on being turned round, walks just as indus-
triously the other way.
Young Isaev, for a moment taken aback, caught up with
her in three strides. "What's the matter, Tatiana Pavlovna?
I want to tell you something. Won't you come and sit in
the shade of the tree for half an hour?"
'Tes, of course I will, presently, dear Petya. I must do
somethingI had forgotten, first."
She always called people dear in a cold voice. Like her
twitched-on, twitched-off smile, the dear was a sort of
concession, kind yet shy, to humanity. She walked back to
the washtubs and Piotr walked beside her.
"My aunt heard from my cousin Sasha Weber this
morning," said Piotr, after wondering for a momentwhat to
say.
"Did he find the world as wide as he expected?" asked
Tatiana.
"He hasn't been all over it yet, Tanya, so he can't tell.
He has only reached Pa-tao-kou."
"Oh," said Tatiana, with her apologetic smile. She
minded very much when her questions evoked dead an-
swers. They often did. She tried to join in the talk in
the manner of other talkers, but so often the talk myste-
flJJ 48 £iJJ
riously died of her gentle intervention. I think that a re-
mark of hers, though dressed in the trappings of ordinary
convenient comment, was often hke a fairy coming into a
room full of flesh-and-blood men and women. There was
the fairy, in no tangible way different from themselves,
dressed like themselves, walking, moving like themselves,
yet somehow accompanied by cold airs, aloof, terrifying,
humiliating. And one man finds that he has forgotten a let-
ter he meant to write, another that he has a business ap-
pointment, another that he promised to take the dog for
a walk . . . and so the poor fairy is left alone—not rudely
but inexorably—
left alone, looking itself up and down in
the mirror, wondering what was wrong. . . wondering
how they knew. . . .
Tatiana looked at Piotr with remorse, and saw uneasiness
in his pink face. His face was ugly and anxious; his brassy
hair and eyelashes looked lighter in tone than his face; his
nose was sunburnt, prominent, and fat. Tatiana's ready,
cold pity was aroused by the tight puckered skin that in-
closed his hurt feelings. She thought of the skull inside that
skin—sensitive to a blow; of the brain inside that skull—
protesting, defensive, bewildered, also afraid of assault. She
saw him as a besieged creature in a fortress, marshaling its
defenses against her. She felt as if she were trespassing
against her will on something almost unbearably sacred, by
simply seeing his face. She was seeing too much. Poor Piotr!
this is not the way young girls should see young men—
yet
so it was! Tatiana, however, though only eighteen, was wise
enough not to put her compassion into words.
She could not think of anything else to put into words,
either. She always boggled over words, and would not have
recognized the properly girlish ones, even if they had oc-
curred to her. Norwas she interested enough in spanningthis
giddy space between herself and Piotr to risk anything for
the sake of building a bridge over it. She did not know how
m 49 aa
to approach him; she could not bear that he should ap-
proach her. Herbody she did not know, but in her mind she
was fanatically virgin. Every approach was a danger, she
could not have explained why. And yet she must be al-
lowed to trespass secretly upon her neighbors; she must have
hostages in many camps; she must send herself often far
away from home to be a protesting prisoner in other bodies.
Alittle pang in every one's pain seemed hers, just as a lamb's
leaping, an impudent flirt of a free bird's wing, so often
seemed part of her vicarious youth—
a word she herself
had known but left unspoken, a satisfaction in itself, like a
flattery. Perhaps she was an egoist—an egoist whose center
had slipped—an egoist whose ego had spilled over, tainted
too much. She was like a person who lived on a mountain
instead of in her own house. That was poor Piotr's trouble,
though he did not know it
—Tatiana was never at home,
waiting inside herself for visitors, as other young people
are
—waiting behind her own threshold—watching out of
her own eyes. You might call—Tanya, Tanya—
at her
pretty ear, and her voice would reply, as it were, from a long
way off. Her sight was unglazed by eyes and therefore too
coldly clear—like frosty air as you come out too early in
the dawn from your smoky house. Tanya, Tanya, you might
call, posturing before her window, but she would be away,
watching you quietly from the hill, seeing you, not as you,
but as a little far part of herself, dancing in the distance.
She was both too far and too near. She loved her neighbor
as herself because she found herself in her neighbor, but if
you were her neighbor, you found that she loved you no
better than herself—and therefore not at all.
Whata detestable advantage it gave her, to be high on the
hill, safe, away from home, yet near enough to hear, with
her remote cold senses, your heart beating. Howwrong that
she should claim to have the key to your lock and yet, her-
self, present no lock, no door, no house, even, for your un-
fiifl 50 fiJ3
locking. And yet her face and body were so lovely that you
must love them even more than you hated her passionless
mind and heart—
you could not help calling—Tanya,
Tanya—before the empty windows of a deserted house at
the foot of the hill, hoping always to lure her home, inside
herself, to welcome you in at last.
She had a smile that pulled the corners of her lips up and
the corners of her eyes down, but it was never meant for
you, except secondarily; when you smiled in reply, hers
vanished, was twitched away.
Tatiana did not know that she lived on a hill; she only
knew that she had no neighbors; her neighbors all must
harbor bei, but she had no neighbors. To be approached
was entirely unbearable; a desiring or acute glance was in
itself an assault; see she must, but to be seen was some-
how insult. She loathed touch and always avoided it;
the lightest accidental touch rasped her like a cat's tongue.
Love of her neighbor was a thing felt stilly, thinly dif-
fused among pitied lovers—puppies—parents—flowers
—insects—
even things (she often felt guilty for disap-
pointing things)—even invented things—blank pensioners
of her compassionate fancy. She drew no ecstasy except
through her eyes. And she felt a little giddy always because
she saw so many things and had so little known self—
or
such a wide, unknown self—out of which to see them. She
saw now, as she walked, a collapsing hour-glass of blue sky.
She watched clouds crushing it in, and a sand of light spill
out of it. Then, as she came to the washtub, her attention
swooped suddenly to the reason of her return—
a woolly-
bear caterpillar, swimming in the suds. It had been swim-
ming there for some time—not exactly swimming, for it
was too light to break through the soapy skin of the water,
and occasionally it found a sodden island of linen to walk
across. Its fur was dry, but it looked exhausted. Tatiana,
most of whose diversions of the mind were curiously cruel.
fljl 51 ffl
had dared herself to let it nearly drown so that its relief at
ultimate rescue might be the more glorious. Then Piotr's
whistle had made her forget it
—madeher prolong the poor
insect's ordeal more than she had intended. She put her
finger under it now and caught it up to safety. She laid her
finger against a blade of grass and, when the caterpillar had
found its footing on its own world, she knelt down and
watched it. She was imagining its incredulous delight. Piotr,
puzzled, knelt down beside her. They looked as if they were
about to pray together.
"But what did you come back for, Tanya?"
"For this."
"For what? This slug?"
"Well ... I left it drowning. I forgot it for the moment.
Then I remembered—
so I had to come back."
"But—oh, Tanya—
a caterpillar! WhenI told you I
had something to tell you! Don't be so foolish, for God's
sake, Tanya; don't be so cold. Listen to me—don't laugh
at me."
He looked at her and could not pretend to himself that
she was even paying him the compliment of laughing at
him. Norwas he sure that she was listening. She was breath-
lessly following the caterpillar's course. It rippled earnestly
along like a little machine running on concealed wheels
well provided with shock-absorbers.
Piotr uttered a mild curse and then, seizing an empty
glass jar that had contained washing soda, he placed it up-
side down over the caterpillar, involving that unlucky insect
in yet another unmerited dilemma.
"Tanya, I believe I'm glad—I'm glad that you are so
contrary and unkind. It makes it easier to say these things to
you. Listen, I don't want to stay in Mi-san any more—
I
don't want to see your face any more. . . . I'm tired of your
face. There's something wrong with it; though it is so pretty,
there's no heart behind it. Listen, Tanya—don't look at
tSh S2 tSA
that damned bug—
listen. Fm going away. There was no
reason why you should have treated me so
—
we were
betrothed. There is nothing to keep us apart now, except
your own hard heart. That and my feeling of being tired of
you, of course. You have lost something by your hard-
heartedness, I can tell you. Some day you will be sorry. You
are kinder to that caterpillar than to a man, Tanya. I can
tell you, some girls know a man's value better. Once lost,
I am lost forever. You will be sorry.. . . W^at do you ex-
pect? No man of flesh and blood can go on forever loving a
girl that only smiles at—
caterpillars. What is the matter
with you, that you hold yourself so much above love? What
else is there for you? Do you want to live and die alone?"
"No—
no—Petya," she said at once in tears. The word
alone had a terrible sound to her. Yet she had no defense
against it, because the reality, loneliness, was her right—her
unassailable pride. To live and die alone was like living and
dying on a throne; she took her queenship so much for
granted that she did not know of it. It was only the word
alone that had such a cruel, insulting sound—
synonymous
with undefended. Her wordless diffused egoism demanded
defense against all that was implied by the word alone. A
queen has a right to be defended. Yet, of course, Tatiana
defended herself—she would have resented that intrusion,
actual defense. Perhaps she needed fairy counselors and was
only offered lovers. Perhaps she needed the comfort of
God and was only offered the love of men. At any rate, the
word alone made her cry. Live and die alone. It was uttered
like a threat and therefore it made her cry—just as the
words he crowned a queen, uttered portentously, might
make a queen-beginner cry. Words, heard by the ear, bring
tears from the eyes. But hearts are left firm on their thrones,
deep down, beyond the reach of threats and tears. Alone
—how ugly a word! Alone—how fierce a threat! Alone—
how sore and smarting must Piotr's poor vanity be, to utter
fiJB 53 Jffl
such a threat. She felt an unbearable compassion for him.
She imagined she could hear his baffled vanity—rejected
—driven home—going round and round in his breast, cry-
ing—why—w^hy—why? Other girls, he said, knew his
value better. That was his poor darling vanity that spoke;
he was besieged inside himself—firing off the failing am-
munition of his vanity from behind that pink serious face,
those blinking blue eyes, that hard healthy nose, that deeply-
breathing chest. Of course there was value in that bewildered
body of his—of course other girls knew that value. Why
not? She knew it herself. Yet suddenly, as she reviewed
his deserts, the ver\^ thought of his touching her outraged
her. She felt sick. She stopped cr}ang.
'It's no use, dear Petya," she said in a quavering voice.
"Fm not proud of this fear in me. I don't pretend it. I am
what I am."
But, very deep down in her heart, she was proud of this
birthmark of remoteness. It was not a fear—
it was not a
fleeing away, but a repelling. Somehow she knew without
knowing it, that to be alone was to be judged by a strange
calm standard—
to be judged, in fact, by herself only—
the ideal of pride. Lonehness was in itself a sort of license
to live strangely—
to live according to an outlaw's law.
There was a long silence during which Tatiana, her tears
dr\'ing on her cheeks, watched the caterpillar under the
jam-pot. She thought it was arguing to itself: "Now I must
keep myhead and think clearly. I got in here, so there must
be a way out. That stands to reason/' Aperfectly goodargu-
ment. But there was no way out.
Piotr, who had turned his face away, looked at her and
saw where her attention was. Grunting with irritation, he
knocked the jam-pot over, and the caterpillar, congratulating
itself on this justification of its logic, rippled away.
"Come over to the tree, Tanya, and listen to what I have
to say," said Piotr, hoping there would be no insect life or
512 54 32
other distracting livestock there. But not hoping very
firmly, for anything, he knew, could hold Tatiana's atten-
tion—anything, except a lo\'er.
She was ver\' docile. She walked by his side, back toward
the tree. But, halfway, she stopped and said: "But Petya, is
it any good talking? You know what happened—that day.
It isn't words that can alter things like that."
Piotr remembered. The memory stabbed deeply and
quickly through his tender body. He could feel still the
generous heat of his accepted love—accepted, for she was
docile, and had not refused her lips. WTiy should she re-
fuse? They were betrothed. His memor}^ still rang with her
\uld scream; his hands tingled still to recall the stiffening
of her body as she had fainted. Thunderstruck, almost un-
bearably hurt, he had looked up—round—down—
as he
released her. Had she seen a tiger—heard a shot? No,
nothing had happened except the natural gesture of a quite
ordinary- young man's quite ordinary love. . . . Words to
alter this? He ground his teeth to think that such difficult
unsimple things as words should be needed. For he knew
no fresh words; he hoped for no inspiration of eloquence.
All he had to say was, "But why—why—why?" His only
argument was being what he was—
a healthy decent young
man in love with a beautiful healthy girl, whose parents
sanctioned their betrothal. WTiat was wrong with that?
^^Tlat was there left for words to explain in that? WTien
he said, "\\'ell then, I shall go away," he pictured himself
obscurely in two halves; one half walking inexorably away
over hill and dale, completely carefree, the other half
gloating over the sight of the bereaved Tatiana's remorse, as
she lay, cured of her folly, cr}dng. Come back, come back.
Pet^'a mv darling.. . .
"Well then, Tanya, I shall go away. You will not see me
again."
Tatiana smiled at once. "Will vou reallv, Piotr Gavrilo-
flU 55 323
vitch? Will you really be happy again? I shall think of you
happy again, finding a new thing every minute—waving
your stick—walking happily along.. .
."
"Happy? I am happy now/' said Piotr, sullenly. "It isn't
a woman that could make me unhappy."
She looked apologetic again. "C3i, Pet}'a—
I hurt you.
. . . I wish I had never been born."
"You didn't hurt me. How could you hurt me? Certainly
we would have been married; there was nothing to prevent
it except some whim of yours, Tanya. But why should I
care? I amthe freer for your \\him. This place is too small for
a man like me. Perhaps I shall join the Chinese army as an
officer. Danger doesn't frighten me. Almost certainly I shall
never come back. There will be nobody ever again to bring
you mushrooms."
"How frightful for him," thought Tatiana, "that he can't
hurt me, though he is hurt by me. I wish I could seem hurt."
"Of course I shall be very sorr\'," she mumbled, awkwardly.
"Sorr}! Sorr}- to miss the mushrooms," said Piotr, wildly.
"You and your mushrooms!" The very mention of mush-
rooms suddenly filled his eyes with tears. Mushrooms, pat-
terned on a morning field, seemed to spell Tan\a to him
for a moment. "Mushrooms, indeed!" he croaked. "You
think of nothing but yourself."
"Myself—myself—myself," thought Tatiana. "WTiere is
myself?" She sought through herself for some essential bone
of personality to lay a finger on. "WTiat is it that likes mush-
rooms? \\Tiat is it that fears to be alone and yet must be
alone? WTiat is it that dies of horror when men come too
near? Are my eves, watching caterpillars and watching
Pet}-a's red face—
are my eyes myself? Wliat else? \\Tiat
else?" She tried even to imagine what her outer self looked
like, sitting here on a tree-root one cautious yard away from
Piotr. She could see the spreading tree, spangled with green
light; she could see the red hills under that clear tense light
flJl 56 £|U
that comes just before sunset, the gulhes filHng with long
smoke-blue shadows. . . . She looked along the bent per-
spective of the gully that stretched below the village to a
wide purple and gold valley. The crops, in all colors but all
tinged with the same rich yellow late light, and in all shapes
—
uneven squares, stripes, oblongs, rhomboids—
grew from
a blood-red soil, so that the near barley seemed like pale
green armies wading in blood. Here and there were intervals
of naked red—
acres that had been ploughed for a new sow-
ing. Thepaths, angling about amongthe many-angled crops,
were deepset, as though stitched firmly into the texture of
patched quilted velvet. Villages, of the same dreamlike
smoke-blue as the far mountains, were tucked into gullies
and tributary gulhes, and over each village a thin taut string
of smoke—the smoke of evening cooking—was stretched
flat on the windless air.
And in the middle of this jewel-like elaboration of shape
and color—where was Tatiana? She could not see herself or
put herself into words, but in her mind's eye a pillar of
nothingness reared—
a white mirror, passively accepting the
image of hills and valleys, insects and lovers. . . .
"Well, have you nothing to say to me—before I say
good-by?"
'1 wish you happiness, dear Piotr Gavrilovitch."
"You really want me to go away and be happy somewhere
else and leave you alone?"
"What else is there to do?"
"Do you realize what it is, you foolish girl, for a womanto
live and die alone?"
"I realize very well."
"Well then. . . . Ah, Tanya, would you let mekiss your
eyes—just once—before I go?"
Her heart froze. "Petya—would it make you go more
happily?" There was a hissing in her ears, like something
boiling over—louder and louder—higher and higher. "Ah,
AM 57 fiJJ
but no—
no—no—no/" She burst into tears and
jumped giddily to her feet. She began running back toward
her father's house. She reached the washtubs and plunged
her arms in among the wet clothes, pounding, crying, gasp-
ing, trembling. A terrified glance back toward the tree
showedher that Piotr had gone. Apuff of dust at the corner
of the temple was all that reminded her eyes of him. If her
eyes were her only self—he was gone from her sight now,
gone from her self. She felt suddenly safe—
safe from see-
ing his poor face—
safe from having to pity him—
safe from
invasion. The blank page of herself was safe from inscrip-
tion now. She flapped a wet garment with wild joy in the air.
*'Oi, what a splashing!'* said the servant, Katya, coming
out, carrying two cans of hot water. 'Tou have been crying
again, Tatiana Pavlovna.*'
"Only for a minute," said Tatiana. With the strength of
excitement she emptied out her washtub into the ditch and
wrung out the clothes.' She poured the fresh hot water into
the tub from a foolish height, saying to herself, 'The awed
traveler stood and watched the stupendous cataract from a
neighboring height." She imagined the awed traveler, about
half an inch high, standing on the opposite brim of the
washtub—but she drownedhimat once, by mistake, for the
water, violently poured in, splashed violently over the brim.
"You are wasting half the hot water, you foolish girl!"
shouted Katya. "I have been nearly an hour heating that
water and now you throw it on the mud. Can't you be care-
ful?"
"If I like," said Tatiana. She began swirling the water
round and round in the tub, saying below her breath, 'The
horrors of the maelstrom," and pretending that a little ship,
the size of a peanut shell, full of despairing pinhead sailors,
was whirling round and round, nearer and nearer to the fatal
dark siren dint in the middle of the whirl.
"Tck tck!" said Katya, and, pushing Tatiana aside, she
fil3 58 JU
plunged an armful of soapy linen into the water, instantly
calming the c\done. "Now please, Tatiana Pavlovna, don't
waste time, but help me with the rinsing. It \\dll be dark in
half an hour."
Tatiana began thoughtfully steeping the linen in the
water, pulling it, plunging it slowly, letting the white spines
of linen hems come to the surface here and there like slow
porpoises.
"Where is Piotr Gavrilovitch?" asked Katya.
"He is gone."
"Gone for good?"
"Going for good."
"W^ell, Tatiana Pavlovna, I hope you are properly proud
of yourself—emptying this village completely of its young
men. Piotr Isaev was the last. Now they are all gone. Seven
Russian boys came over in our party from Vladivostok when
we all settled here in Mi-san, and now they are all gone,
thanks to you. In my young days a pretty girl had all the
young men from miles around coming round her like wasps
round honey; she didn't drive them away as though she were
a bad smell."
"Some young woman somewhere's the better for each of
these goings-away of young men," said Tatiana in a high
voice. "Seven pots of honey somewhere have one bad smell
in Mi-san to thank for their seven wasps."
She had no defense against Katya's talk. Katya could not
help vomiting spiteful talk, thought Tatiana. One had to
forgive other people with weak stomachs, even if they dis-
gusted one—
so why not Katya's surfeit and indigestion of
crude words?
"It's no good pretending you don't care," went on Katya.
"No young girl wants to be an old maid. That's what you'll
be, Tatiana Pavlovna—
a finicky old maid, whining over a
fat cat. Look at you now—
left alone—not another young
manof your own race within a hundred miles. Whatdo you
813 59 22
want to do about it
—mam- a smelly Korean or a Japanese
shopkeeper who doesn't come up to your elbow and blows
wind through his teeth? Do you like the idea? \Miat's the
matter with you that all the young men run away at the last
minute? It's a disgrace to this house, I assure you. Tve
known vou almost as long as vour mother has, and I can tell
you it keeps me awake of nights. The disgrace of it. It's not
natural. Young men didn't run away from me, I can tell
you, when I was a pretty girl. Of course, after I'd borne
seven children and buried five and lost my figure, that was a
different matter. Men always run away from a red nose and
three hundred pounds of flesh—
it's their nature. But from
a prett}- girl—that's not nature, Tatiana Pavlovna, there's
something funny about that."
Tatiana did not speak. She tried to make a loud secret
ston- inside her mind to drown Katya's voice. She pretended,
as she wTung out the linen, that she was a hero, after a ship-
wTCck, sa\ing the drowning, applying artificial respiration.
She did not knowwhat artificial respiration was, but amused
herself a little by pretending it was rather like this wringing
process. Here, she thought, picking up one of her father's
thick unbleached nightgowns—here was a fat old rich Jew
all sodden and limp, andhere she folded him up and twisted
him round, wringing, jerking, laughing as she thought of his
dignit}- all mixed up and intert\\isted, his nose and his toes,
his eyeglasses and his ankles, all in a little buckled salutar}^
—
wet lump, being saved by her—and then, shake, flap
there he was, the old moneygrubber, flat, bloodless, and
pale, but almost his own shape again, the light evening wind
blowing him out as she ran him up on the clothes-line.
"What do \ou think women are for?" went on Kat^-a,
gasping and wheezing as she pounded and wrung. "What
do you think men want of women? Prettv talk—poetn*—
sitting side by side and looking at stars? Why, mvgirl, I can
tell vou men wouldn't mind if women were dumb and im-
flSJ 60 £|IiJ
becile, as long as the women could give them the one thing
they want. Fll tell you whatmarriage is, Tatiana Pavlovna—
it's just getting out of bed, cooking three meals, and getting
back into bed again. Women can't run away from that—
unless they're nuns. There's nothing makes a man so angry
as a womanwho plays the coward in bed—nothing else that
a woman can do can hurt his feelings at all, except, perhaps,
bad cooking. It makes a man mad for a woman not to know
her duty; it's like stabbing him—
it turns his love to bile.
Love, indeed! . . . Whythat's whatlove is
—
just the hope
of going to bed together. But running away from fate is
what you're doing, Tatiana Pavlovna, andFmtelling you for
your good."
Tatiana had been pounding one pillow-case ever since she
saved the scorned Jew. It was an old pillow-case and now
she suddenly pounded a hole in it.
"Why, you ought to have been proud to be wanted by
all those fine young men," persisted Katya, in a grinding
voice. "A thin, white little thing like you—and all the good
red-blooded Russian wenches that have to shrivel up as
virgins, these days, or sleep with yellow men. God knows
Piotr Isaev was no catch for your father's daughter, and he a
common gardener's son; still, he was a man—the last man
in Mi-san—and now he's turned his back on you. You
ought to be ashamed, breaking your father's and mother's
hearts by your whimsies."
"Real people like to be nagged at," thought Tatiana.
"Nagged at by love and other things—asked and asked to
give something. Only hills and rivers and flowers and ani-
mals are allowed to be free—not to ask for anything. The
more you ask of people the more sure they feel that they are
people. It's their me—
to be nagged at. I don't ask for any-
thing, so I'm not allowed to be alive. I'll be kind to them
—
I'll cry for them—
I'll laugh for them—
I'll pretend I'm
them—but people don't want that; they want to claw my
£ia 61 52
meand thev want me to claw theirs. Not to nag is to insult
them."
She saw little circles in outline, fl}ing about on blankness,
each circle trying to pursue, attack, overlap and obliterate
another. WTienever one circle succeeded in overlapping an-
other, the area of their intersection was suffused with black;
the words wicked hhck formed in her mind. No circle
seemed content to let its outline rest coolly on another's—
to admit another's integrity. Black trespass was the inspira-
tion of all.
'It's something not natural in you; it's like a devil in you,"
said Kat\-a. "A devil sticking a knife into men's stomachs.
It's like kilhng something—
to scream and faint and kick up
a fuss when a man offers to give you—
all he has to give,
poor beast. A man feels killed. It's as if you'd killed those
seven lovers of yours, Tatiana Pavlovna."
'Tet they're not dead. They're offering it to some one
else by now," thought Tatiana. "And I'm alive, too." Then
that thought broke. "But am I? Am I? Is this a life—this
seeing—this thinking for caterpillars and men? If in the
morningI was hanging from a branch of that tree there,
would there be one life less in the world—
or only a pair of
eyes shut for good? WTiere is Tanya—washing clothes—
hanging from a tree? Tanya the nothing—who by her
nothingness killed seven loves and broke the hearts of her
father and mother. . .
."
And then, thinking of lovers, she saw the circles trespass-
ing more and more within one another's outlines till some
wholly covered others, each couple becoming one black
circle. Her brain began to freeze. Ahigh throbbing note be-
gan to sound in her ears. All the hills began rolling slowlv on
an upward slant behind the darkening window of her eves.
"Katya! Katya!"
"Oh, little fool! Oh, my darling! Katya's coming!" cried
the old woman, running towards her.
m m,
•T«T*T*1 /•?••
•T«T»T«T*T*Y*T*Y«'
/M/mmsm/sm
•T*V*T*V«T*^ '•Y«VtY«Y«
VAV
CHAPTER FIVE
Seryozha lay in bed in his little room, which was just an
oblong bite taken out of the kitchen. His bed was the origi-
nal kang of this Korean house—
a brick-and-plaster oven.
On it
—since it was summer—
were spread all the winter
quilts and blankets to intervene between Seryozha's heavy
young bones and the hard kang. The colder it grew in au-
tumn, the more quilts were taken from beneath his body to
be placed above it. Seryozha always connected winter with
heavy dreaming, since at that season he always had to sleep
flat on his back to save his hip bones from contact with the
almost unpadded heated kang. But now, in summer, there
were three quilts beneath him, and Seryozha could lie com-
fortably on his side, bent into the shape of a query mark,
glaring at the window. The window, carved by Anna long
ago with a blunt saw out of the boards of the outer wall, was
high up in the corner made by the flimsy kitchen partition
and the ceiling. It was very crooked. Anna was, in all her
contrivings, too ardent ever to measure things. "I work by
eye only," she would boast, triumphantly daring you to
make the obvious retort as she flaunted her results all askew.
Seryozha glared at the window till the foolish, crooked
fttft 63 AiA
block of sunny morning light printed itself on his retina, so
that when his eye wandered, a black crooked window was
stamped all over the room. He was so full of angry single-
hearted determination that, as he clenched his teeth, he felt
as if his burning self, pregnant with its passion to get its own
way, was too big for his skin; he had to keep his aching jaws
and the smarting muscles round his eyes locked against its
rising, bursting growth. There seemed to be a kind of ex-
plosion impending of swelling, thwarted will.
"Kept at home like a little schoolboy," he thought, tears
of irritation squeezing out of the corners of his eyes. Seoul,
the city denied, rose like a palace before him. He thought of
his mother in a distorted paroxysm of anger. Her ungainli-
ness, her uncontrolled loud voice, her dusty abundant hair,
her thick ankles, the hiccoughs that afflicted her when she
was agitated—
all madeher a hateful effigy in his mind, into
which he stuck pins of impotent protest.
He felt alternately rooted to this unloved little house—
and far away, walking heroically along a resilient bright road
—stopping where he liked—getting wet when he liked—
never having to argue—kicking the behinds of rude little
Chinese boys—buying sweets and cigarettes recklessly—
banging his stick against trees with a various resonance—
lighting little fires at the feet of fantastic rocks. Then sud-
denly—zip—his future telescoped, his traveling thoughts
were snatched back to reality—back to prison, as the Rev-
erend Mr. Butters's pincenez, when he let them go, were
snatched back to concealment by a spring under his lapel.
Seryozha's dog, with a coarse, confident scratch born of
long habit, threw open the latchless door from the kitchen
and came in. Seeing Ser}'Ozha awake, the dog began to
curtsy, to make a little falsetto humming noise through its
nose, to wag about two-thirds of its spine—from shoulder-
blades to tail tip—
as it waltzed about the floor, never taking
its eyes from Seryozha's face. ScPyOzha glared at the dog,
32 64 UiIJ
making no answer to its extravagant greeting. He was fond
of the dog, or rather, fundamentally accustomed to it; he
felt as if the dog were part of himself, so it never occurred
to him to be responsive or polite to it. Sometimes, to the
dog's rapturous delight, he swung it about by the teeth, or
threw it violently across the room in a frenzy of joviality.
But today he stared moodily through it, and the dog, though
experience had not given it much ground for hope, re-
doubled its efforts. It reared itself delicately up and planted
one tentative paw on the edge of the Icang, swishing its tail
wildly from side to side. No protest, no encouragement. It
stretched its neck shyly forward and lightly licked the tip of
Ser}'Ozha's nose. As if this chaste kiss—like the prince's kiss
on the lips of the Sleeping Beauty—had called the dormant
energies of the prostrate god into action, Seryozha suddenly
sat up, and his bare leg, swinging out of bed with a scythe-
like action, cut down the erect figure of the dog as though it
had been a swathe of corn. Seryozha had heard through the
door left open by the dog's exuberant entrance sounds of
some one in the kitchen. He could begin worrying his
mother again. Theimpotent watches of the night were past.
The dog picked itself up, pleased. For it, too, the day had
begun. It began scratching its mastoid energetically.
Seryozha pulled on his trousers, wriggled his blouse over
his head, and, while still buckling his belt, was in the kit-
chen, glaring across the table at his mother.
Anna, dressed in a cotton underbodice that much ac-
centuated her stout flabby bust, a crocheted shawl, and a
thick crimson flounced petticoat, was sitting at the table,
playing patience. She looked up, a little abashed, as Seryozha
came in, and mumbled in tones that sank lower and lower,
"I was looking through the cupboard for that bar of wash-
ing-soap—
I am sure I did not use it up; it is somewhere, I
know—and I came across the old pack of cards and I
thought I would try if I could remember that game that
fljfl 65 ijffl
Mrs. Atkinson . .
/' Her voice faded away into a deep
growling, "The four on the five and then the king goes
Her son's cold eye was fixed upon her in disgust. "Mam-
ma, about the matter we were talking of last night/' he
cried, hoarsely. He had been rehearsing arguments during
the small hours; they had seemed irresistible at the time, but
now they eluded him.
"What were we talking of last night?" asked Anna, a
mulish look coming over her face. She added, "And then the
red nine on the black ten."
"Mamma, it isn't fair. . . . I'm a man now. . . . Mam-
ma, remember I am in my nineteenth year.. . . You don't
realize. . . . Look at the way I arranged things with the
Chinese when papa was away. . . did I behave like a child
then? And now, when it is simply a matter of a little busi-
ness journey. .
."
"It is useless to go on talking like this, Seryozha. You and
your father must have lost your wits, to have such an idea.
Walking all alone to Seoul. What an idea! Why, you can't
even walk from here to Erh-tao-kou without getting into a
fight with Chinese coolies. . . . And it isn't age that makes
any difference. Your father's as big a fool as you are, and
God knows he's old enough to know better."
"But, mamma, I have admitted that that was a folly
it was papa's idea, and I protected him as far as I could. You
said yourself at the time. . . . And look at those men we
buried that day—soldiers—
officers—and one of them
looked younger than I am. Their mothers
. .
." For a mo-
ment he thought enviously of the countless orphans of the
revolution. Probably those dead soldiers had no mothers.
"At any rate, that fight was, I admit, a stupid business—
a whim of papa's. This Seoul idea is a real business matter."
"A pretty business matter," said Anna, sweeping her cards
violently together, making a sort of splash of cards. "A very
flJJ 66 filiJ
pretty business matter—taking a three weeks' holiday from
your good regular work in order to wander off to ask an old
rogue for some money your father lent him ten years ago.
Alikely thing, isn't it? . . . Andeven if you got the money,
how long do you think you would keep such a sum?—
thieves along every road and in every inn, and rogues and
harlots always on the lookout for young fools like you. What
about that five yen I gave you last Christmas to buy a boiler,
and you spent it all on a present for that little brothel-grub,
Sonia?"
'1 was young then," said Seryozha, confused. "And in any
case I give all the money I earn to you, so surely I have a
right to spend five yen once in mylife. However, I confess
tliat I was mistaken in Sonia's character. It was a long time
."
ago. .
Wliere were all the telling phrases thathad filed so orderly
through his mind in the dark clearness of the night?
"Mamma,another thing is . .
." Hestopped distractedly.
He had forgotten the other thing—
all the other things.
"Well?"
Seryozha stamped his foot with an oath. He thought of
the rather dashing, mocking, grown-up attitude he habitu-
ally maintained toward his father and mother, in his own
eyes—and even, to some extent, in theirs. He remembered,
in a rather glorified form, his conversation with his father
about the two hundred yen. "My good papa, to leave two
hundred yen in the hands of a probably dishonest and cer-
tainly incompetent peasant! Was that business-like?" . . .
"Dear old man, do you mean rubles, dollars, or yen? I want
to understand this matter thoroughly so that I can help
you. .
." That was the proper tone—the usual tone. And
now—"Oh, mamma—oh, please, mamma,let mego!. . .
Really, mamma, do believe that Vm not a child any
more. . .
." Poor Seryozha, he felt robbed of something
that he violently resented losing—
a king robbed of his
63 67 flJS
crown and suddenly made a beggar. He began to despair.
Never had the journey to Seoul seemed more necessar}- to
his happiness than at that moment. Then suddenly, with a
sort of artificial revulsion of feeling, he let it go. The only
thing left, then, was not to want to go—
to want not to go.
Not only to cease pleading, but to be actually glad that he
was not going on a hot, dust}' journey among silly, whining,
flapping Koreans. By ceasing to want to go he could get even
with his mother, he could save his self-esteem. Even if his
mother were to implore him to go now, he would refuse.
"Too much trouble, mamma," he rehearsed inwardly in a
languid, superior, secret voice. "And nothing to show for it
in the end. You and papa would waste the money on mud-
dles and follies, even if I were to get it for you."
He looked round with a cold, critical look, collecting evi-
dence of his parents' inferiority, in order to comfort him-
self. Anna had upset a saucepan full of greasy water in the
corner near the stove, and, since the mud floor was slightly
concave, a long dark snake of water stretched slowly toward
the middle of the kitchen. There was no neatness anywhere.
The edge of the \nndow—now hanging open on limp
home-made hinges—
was tattered with the strips of paper
that in winter had been pasted round the edges of the panes
to keep out the cold. The wall was all mottled with damp
patches; a great marbled shape of damp had been there for
years, and, in Ser\-ozha's unconsciously ingenious eyes, rep
resented a woman in a fl\ing cloak reaching for a great fly-
ing rose. She had three arms, to be sure, but vou can't ex-
pect nature's artistic bv-products to be so accurate as all
that. ...
Poor Ser}-ozha bit his lips and sucked them in as he turned
away to stare moodily down at his dog. The dog would have
enjoyed the walk to Seoul; they would ha\e been like two
parts of the same Seryozha—
one part walking proudly, the
other part leaping, blowing in the wind, barking at larks.
JlJJI 68 SU
scratching at rat-holes, drinking puddles.. . . However^
Seryozha thought, I wouldn't go now if I were asked. Cer-
tainly the dog would have had a good time. But a man can't
take a three weeks' walk simply to please a dog.
The dog lay in a curve on the floor. Evidently some other
dog—probably its last lady-love—
was thinking of it, for its
ear itched—the traditional symptom. It wriggled and
wagged its ear repeatedly. Its eyes were open. It liked the
sound of voices. That damn goat, too, was somewhere else.
Everything seemed to the dog to be going nicely.
Anna squeezed her face into an upside-down isosceles tri-
angle between her hands, her elbows pressed on the table
among the cards. She looked at her son, restless with pity for
him, as he stood staring down at the dog, raising his eye-
brows in childish and studied indifference, shuffling his toe,
pretending to tread on the dog's tail. She would make him
some curd cakes this afternoon; he loved those. Perhaps she
could afford that Brownie kodak in the Japanese shop, if
she did without her new dress length. After all, he gave her
almost all his earnings. It never occurred to her to relent on
the Seoul question. All the dangers that lurked for him out-
side her sight accumulated round the very thought of the
ridiculous journey—brigands, swindlers, earthquakes and
other convulsions of nature, tigers, brothels, Japanese police-
men, prisons, diseases, drownings in rivers. . . . Seryozha
would have been a super-boy to have suffered even a third of
them in three weeks. But Anna's imagination was always
over-exuberant. She did not follow up her fears at all because
—
well, simply, he was not going to Seoul. Curd cakes and
perhaps a kodak for him. Still, the sight of his tremulous
eyebrows and pursed lips made her throat ache with pity.
Old Sergei felt his wayin at the door. "No breakfast yet?"
he exclaimed in an unusually high sweet voice. "Ah well,
these glorious summer days tempt one to procrasti-
nate. . .
." It was at once obvious that today he was The
fiJl 69 £23
Perfect Christian; serenity was the password of the moment.
Anna and Seryozha were to reaHze that they had an afflicted
saint in their midst. He had had shght qualms in the night,
thinking that, if he were really to die, Anna in her present
mood would be but a tearless widow and Seryozha an all too
resilient orphan.
The kid bleated outside in the shed. The dog mumbled a
growl of jealous irritation into its own tail as it lay sleepily
curved in a bar of sunlight.
"And the little goat?" asked Old Sergei with a sugared
playfulness. "The most important member of the house-
hold? Did it sleep well? Has it breakfasted?"
With a loud crude snort, Anna rose and began slamming
down bread, cups, knives, and spoons on the bare table
among the playing-cards. Old Sergei sat down at the foot of
the table. His thin, gaunt hands, like little wan giraffes strid-
ing, patted about among the cards. "Playing cards before
breakfast? Well, well, well! . .
." he said in a voice of resig-
nation, but with an effort made no complaining comment.
"If we had money," he added, "we could allow ourselves,
perhaps, a little Korean girl as servant. But I dare say you
are right, Annitchka my dove, in thinking that we are best
as we are—without the money I left with Isaev in Seoul.
Of course the interest would have mounted up very con-
siderably in ten years—but as you say, Annitchka, what is
money? Poverty is nothing, as long as we have love and
peace in our home. It was only for your sake and Seryozha's
that I thought of it. You are not so young as you were, and
I thought a little maidservant. . . . However, it is not
to be."
"It certainly is not," said Anna, who had never appreci-
ated the effective weight of silence as an argument. "The
child is most certainly not going to Seoul by himself, so you
had better give up the idea."
An almost agonizing pang went through Seryozha as he
fdil 70 fSfi
heard this, but he thought, 'If they only knew—
I wouldn't
go now, even if they went down on their knees to me. Prob-
ably I shall run away altogether; they can expect nothing
better, treating me as they do. But certainly I will not do
their fetching and carrying, either to Seoul or anywhere
else."
"Did you not hear me say, my dove, that I had given up
the idea?" said Old Sergei, gently. "I am only explaining to
you now, in retrospect, what my idea had been. I had not,
of course, thought of sending the child unprotected. If you
are a mother, dearest Annitchka, remember that I am a
father, and Ser}'Ozha's safety is as much my preoccupation
as yours. I had thought of looking for some trustworthy
"
fellow—
a superior coolie—who for a small wage
"If he found an angel from God to go with him/' said
Anna raucously, "I might let him go. Short of that . .
."
Ser)ozha, who actually stood before her nearly six feet tall
and with a slight shimmer of very young beard on his pink
cheeks, was shrinking in her imagination with every word
of the discussion. He had now almost got back to the wean-
ing stage, and she saw a flashing picture of one of God's
angels pushing her baby away from her in a pram.
"An angel from God, Seryozha," said Old Sergei, whim-
sically and plaintively. "You will have to look long to
find an angel from God willing to protect a poor Russian.
Poor Russians indeed! God has forgotten them—he sends
no angels now. . . . But of course, my dear," he interrupted
himself, cooing, as he turned to Anna, "I was not insisting
on the boy's taking the journey. I had only referred to the
fact that it had been for your sake I had entertained the idea.
The money would have been useful to you rather than to
me. A little maidser\^ant... an oil stove instead of that
mud oven. . . . Such things would have made life easier
for you—given you leisure, perhaps, to play cards in the
mornings instead of troubling about your husband's break-
flifl 71 IJJS
fast. Poverty and discomfort wear out even the most de-
voted. . . . For myself, whyshould I mind? I have not long
to live in this world... an old blind man on the brink of
the grave has no temptation to think of himself."
"Why don't you write for the money? If Isaev is really
willing to repay it, he could send it."
"You do not understand the ins and outs of the affair,
dear Annitchka. Hov/ should you—
a trusting, sweet-
hearted woman like yourself? It is for the head of the family
to wrestle with such sordid problems—
to protect those he
"
loves from the miseries of
'1 don't want any breakfast," said Seryozha, suddenly.
"And I shall not go to work today. My back aches. I am
going out."
His dog, as ready for its call as a good fireman, reached
the door as soon as he did. Their shadows merged in a
muddle of wagging, striding black and white at the door.
Seryozha and the dog stood together in the doorway, look-
ing out at the bright day.
Anna looked at Seryozha and felt, on his behalf, an
elaborate fanciful female version of the boy's impotent
disappointment. She sat hacking violently at the bread,
muttering and hiccoughing to herself, clapping her knees
together under her absurd petticoat. She was always hurting
some one, she thought, making some mistake or being
obliged to correct some one else's mistake in a painful way.
She so seldom managed to feel that she was giving satisfac-
tion; wherever she went she imagined people thinking,
"Why doesn't Anna . . . ? Why does Anna . . . ? If it
weren't for Anna. . .
." She felt that she had been endowed
with a superfluity of power to hurt and thwart people. Curd
cakes and a kodak would be nothing but a bribe to her son
—
a bribe to persuade him to overlook her accursed genius
for being an obstacle.
"I'm making some curd cakes for tea," she said in a
ffl 72 iJiJJ
defiant cross voice toward her son's defiant cross back in
the doorway.
'1 don't hke curd cakes. I was sick last time I ate your
curd cakes/' said Seryozha. Simply because he had loved
curd cakes as a child, he thought, she retained her obsession
that they were a poultice for all the austere wounds of his
maturity.
He walked away into the wide, straggling, pitted street.
His dog burst out of the yard like a torpedo and exploded in
facetious barkings at the tail of the debased but nimble
Korean dog that lived next door. The Korean dog had such
short legs that they were little more than four bumps on its
lower corners
—nevertheless, it fled with the lowly agility
of a lizard. Ser)'ozha's dog walked with the stiffness of pride
for a few minutes after that, and followed its master to
the river.
The river was crossed by a wooden bridge with a sort of
petticoat of dog-toothed wooden frill prudishly concealing
the upper part of its piers. This decoration showed that it
was a Russian-built bridge, and, in fact, Seryozha's own
hands had sawed and planed some of its planks. One could
not say, however, that it was well built. A Russian refugee,
a military engineer, a heroic but untrustworthy creature, had
contracted for and designed the work only the year before,
and now the thing was, unfortunately, tumbling down. The
Chinese local authorities did not mind very much; they
were well used to things tumbling down immediately after
they were finished. Obstinately proud, therefore, of their
petticoated but frail bridge, they quite cheerfully paid for
endless pinnings together, proppings up and general cod-
dlings of their treasure. At present the river was in flood, and
logs rushing down the swollen stream from far lumber
camps were a constant menace to the knock-kneed piers of
the bridge, so, clinging to the toe of every pier, a coolie sat,
chivalrously pushing fierce logs away with a pole. Wher-
£li3 73 (SiJ
ever one person is found doing something definite in China,
there also are found a score of people watching him do it.
The sagging balustrade of the bridge was lined with shaven
heads bending over to watch the defense against the blun-
dering attack of the logs.
Seryozha thrust himself into this line of watchers, his
strong square shoulders and forearms wedged between two
skinny Chinese torsos. Seryozha's dog swaggered along the
line of humanbehinds and calves, sniffing lightly at each leg,
as if playing with the idea of biting a piece out of one—
though of course it had too sacred a respect for the integrity
of human skin actually to lift a tooth against it. Still, it
would be a damn good joke, thought the dog, opening and
shutting its nose jovially against one calf after another.
Next to Seryozha a young Chinese in European clothes
lolled superciliously over the balustrade. This young man
had a nose that sprang abruptly like a little eagle's beak
from a flatness between very bright black eyes. He lifted his
rather negroid upper lip often to show one sparkling gold
tooth in the middle of a row of ordinary yellow bone ones.
On the top of his very thick, coarse, carefully parted black
hair a too small Panama hat cocked a flaunting brim, and
round the crown of the hat a ribbon showed what may well
have been a medley of the colors of Eton, one of the more
refined cycling clubs, and the Salvation Army. The young
man had a very lively, acute expression, in spite of his de-
liberate attitude of scorn, and from the moment when
Seryozha settled his elbows on the adjoining yard of balus-
trade, the sparkling lidless eyes of the young Chinese never
left the Russian's face.
'Tou speak English?" said the stranger to Seryozha.
For a moment Seryozha, who was in a very bad temper,
considered ignoring the remark. He spoke fairly fluent Eng-
lish, taught by his Anglophil mother, and often used that
language with her to annoy his father by shutting him out
tS^ 7^ m
from jokes or secrets. He glowered at the stranger and
then, struck in his tender heart by the look of polite con-
fident expectancy on the face of the Chinese, he said, "I
speak Enghsh—not much, but enough/'
'1 could see at once you were not English, of course,"
said the young man. 'Tou are Russian. I could not, of
course, make a mistake on a thing like that. Yet, since I
speak no Russian and you, probably, no Cantonese dialect,
I thought I was perhaps justified in addressing you in Eng-
lish. I was right. Allow me to introduce myself—Mr. Wil-
fred Chew—Chu Wei-fu."
He watched closely for Seryozha's bow, but Seryozha's
large untutored body knew none of these graces. Seryozha
simply looked at the Chinese with a cold rather stolid in-
tensity, his mouth a little open, his fingers drumming rather
impudently on the wooden rail in front of him. Mr. Chew
himself bowed, therefore, once for Seryozha and once for
himself. He was evidently a young man who never spared
himself this kind of effort.
"I myself speak English quite perfectly," he said. *'I have
lived in England for many years—in London, to be exact,
as a law student. I am now qualified to practice as a bar-
rister. I could have made a fortune in London in the law,
I dare say. But I am not the kind of man who deserts his
country. I am Chinese. I am not ashamed of being Chinese.
On the contrary. I therefore return to China to lay my
services at her feet."
"Oi-oi!" said Seryozha. He had never heard the English
tongue spoken so fast—
or through a gold tooth. The com-
bination of speed and sparkle he found intriguing but be-
wildering.
"Russians," went on Mr. Chew, "are a people of very
striking intelligence, influence, and—in short, a people full
of soul. Nevertheless, in Canton, my native city, I must
confess that, from the point of view of an Enghsh trained
I
US! 75 £113
professional man like myself, the Russian influence seems
perhaps not altogether Excuse me, sir, what are your
politics?"
'Tolitics?" squeaked Seryozha. "Oi! I am sorry, I am not
a political person/'
"No pohtics? Well, of course, my dear Mr.—
—
er
sympathise with your point of view. It shows intelligence.
Living in a foreign land as your business evidently obliges
you to do, you feel, very reasonably, that you cannot suffi-
ciently keep in touch with the conflicting ideas that followed
upon the Russian revolution—that the Bolshevik theory,
interesting though it may be"
"Eh—Bolshevikr said Seryozha. "I mistook. I thought
you have said politics. Eh no, of course, my family is a very
White Russian family—most White indeed."
"I thought so. I was right. Well, as I was saying, the
Bolsheviks have made Canton, my native city, a quite im-
possible place for a man like myself to conduct a career in.
They are called 'bloody Bolshies,' you know, sir, in London
—and truly it is so. Shanghai is almost as bad, and—
to
"
make a long story short
"You cannot," said Seryozha, who had been listening
intently.
"Cannot what?"
"You cannot make a long story now short. It is too late.
The story already is long. Though very interesting," he
added politely, seeing the expression of poor Mr. Chew's
face.
Wilfred Chewswallowed twice, with two little clicks, and
his face looked suddenly childishly abashed and disap-
pointed. Onethin eyebrow puckered and rose high, as if that
eye were trying to say, "Well, I at least don't care . .
."
"Ah," said Mr. Chew, and was silent, trying to be brave.
They leaned on the balustrade side by side, watching in
silence the logs coming down in a disorderly scattered
fiJJ 76 iJiU
charge. Every approaching log was announced to the
bridge's defenders by a roar of warning from the spectators.
Logs that traveled meekly endways were allowed to pass
under the bridge unmolested, with a ready pole held hover-
ingly over them at the crucial moment, or, if they steered
too close to a pier, a light kick from a coolie's bare out-
stretched foot. But other logs, broadside on to their course,
rolled clumsily down the muddy stream like rolling pins on
yellow flour, and these, to the tune of howls of advice and
applause, were deftly turned and steered under the bridge
by the poles of the coolies. In the full central flow of the
current, the logs rushed down like dragons to the attack.
But near the banks of the river they traveled sleepily, even
occasionally making long waltzing pauses in quiet eddies.
These more dilatory attackers exerted a fascination for not
too scrupulous citizens. Somehow, out of a group of logs
that remained too long in harbor, one or two were likely
never to put to sea again. All the cottages near by had the
smoke of a good supply of firewood rising out of their chim-
neys, and one householder was frankly building a new
bullock-shed of damp planks.
Seryozha's dog squeezed itself between Seryozha and
Wilfred Chew and, putting both paws on a horizontal rail
below the balustrade, leaned out intelligently to watch the
doings on the river. It barked once or twice in rather an
affected voice, and then, deciding that it had shown all the
interest that it could be expected to show in an almost
smell-less entertainment, went away to talk with a group of
farm dogs outside an inn near by.
Seryozha was uncomfortable about this deathlike silence
in his right ear. He disliked the feeling of snubbing or inter-
rupting anything. He obscurely wanted things to go on
happily by themselves—puppies to go on playing, suns to
go on rising and setting, flowers to go on growing, babblers
lllifl 77 IJIJ
to go on babbling.... Of course, killing animals was
different. Killing was part of the game of life that had a
right to go on. Killing was allowed but snubbing was not.
"And London?" he said, in a grumbling, ungracious voice.
'It is a good city?"
"London," said Mr. Chewinstantly, as if a cork had been
pulled out, "is not, conventionally speaking, perhaps, a
beautiful city. There are fogs and a great many rains. West-
minster Abbey, the Tower of London, Buckingham and
Saint James's Palaces, Madame Tussaud's, the Nelson lions^
Selfridge's, and the home of the late Charles Dickens—
all these are sublime structures and, what is very odd, the
dirtiness of the London air and light makes their color
beautiful, streaky, and fitting with their surroundings. If^
however, by the word good you perhaps mean to refer to
morality, it is certainly a fact, Mr.—
er—
, that the London
streets are full of moral dangers for a young man. Luckily
for me, I was very carefully educated in the Christian prin-
ciples at the Wesleyan Academy at Yueh-lai-chou, where I
studied in my boyhood. The second master, namely Rev-
erend Mr. Oswald Fawcett, has been the good influence on
my life. He well prepared me for the temptations of life in
a great city, and so I may say that I passed unscathed
through the fire."
"Oi-oi!" said Seryozha, putting a careful note of enthusi-
asm into the ejaculation this time. "And I think there is
very many motor-cars in London."
"How many are there in Chi-tao-kou?"
"I think five, not speaking about Mr. Chang's motor-
bicycle."
"Thereare probably a thousand times as manyin London.
Motor-cars are undoubtedly among the dangers of the
streets in London. But I was referring to moral dangers
"—wine, women, song
||23 78 £|I3
"We too have singing girls in Chi-tao-kou. Even one
Russian one called Sonia Matvievna/'
'1 dare say you have. But singing girls mean nothing to
me. I take morals and religion very seriously, you see, Mr.
—er—
. . . . Ethics, as we call them in London. Reverend
Mr. Fawcett used always to say, 'One can have a good
time—God likes us to have a good time—but it should
be God's brand of good time.' I always think of those words
when I am in a moral danger. Is this God's brand of good
time?' I say to myself, silently. 'No, it is Satan's brand.'
So I say, 'Get behind.'
'Tck tck!" clicked Seryozha, shaking his head ambigu-
ously as it sank lower and lower between his hunched
shoulders.
"You are asking yourself," continued Mr. Chew, "what
is this man Chew, a barrister from the Middle Temple,
London, E. C. 4., and a Christian of devout morality, doing
in a little halfpenny-farthing town like Chi-tao-kou? And
"
you may well ask, Mr.—
er
"Very well indeed," said Seryozha.
"The truth is that, under the present confused regime in
China, aggravated by 'bloody Bolshies' (as Londoners say),
it is extremely difficult for a highly educated member of
the Middle Temple, called to the bar in London, and,
until recently, the devil of Mr. W. 1. Morgan, the renowned
barrister, to get a living out of practising law in Shanghai
or Canton. I therefore engaged myself, temporarily, in other
employment—that is, I have been acting as companion,
philosopher, and friend (professional) to a young gentle-
man called Sir Theo Mustard, whose late father was a
millionaire in Leeds, England, and whose uncle, now
guardian, sent his charge to see the world, expense no ob-
ject. I must admit that Sir Theo Mustard is not perhaps
altogether fortunate—
or even normal—in mental equip-
ment, and only occasionally showed a keen interest in the
jUl 79 flU
beauty spots to which I guided him. We traveled to the
Yangtze gorges; to Nanking; to the Holy Mountain; to the
model prison, Peking; to call on the Governor of Mukden;
to the Chinese drama; to spend one week in Seoul; to the
Kongo-san; and finally I escorted him, with valet, to the
train in Harbin which will carry him to Berlin. In Harbin
Sir Theo Mustard and I parted with mutual expressions of
good will and"
'To Seoul?" exclaimed Seryozha.
"Yes, Seoul, a fine old-world city, called by some the
Peking of Korea. Of course my professional escort was paid
for with a very handsome salary, but, most unfortunately,
I received bad advice about investments in Harbin, and,
to make a long—
I mean—in short, I found myself
*'
stranded in Manchuria with scarcely a
'Tou have been to Seoul?"
"Yes, I have told you. I went to Seoul with Sir Theo
Mustard and spent there a very enjoyable week, since there
Sir Theo Mustard was afflicted with ear-ache, which obliged
us to stay longer in that picturesque old capital than we had
intended. The ear-ache arose, I think, from an otherwise
most successful afternoon we spent in the Seoul museum.
It made a great impression on Sir Theo Mustard, for he
several times referred to Seoul by name, even after we had
reached Harbin"
"Do you know the way from here to Seoul?"
"Certainly I do. I have a great gift for studying maps,
railway guides, and other schedules, and in NankingI was
able to show Sir Theo Mustard a chart showing our exact
future movements—times of trains—expeditions—
names
of hotels—curio-shops, etcetera—foreshadowing every de-
tail up to the last moment of the trip. Of course it was im-
possible for me to anticipate the ear-ache, but apart from
"
this
"Will you please come with me and visit my mother
flJ3 80 323
and my father to tell them about Seoul?" asked Seryozha.
They both stepped backward from the balustrade with
such alacrity that they trod on two bare Chinese feet on
tiptoe behind them.
"Certainly I will come and visit anybody," said Mr.
Chew. "As soon as I saw your face, Mr.—
er—
, I felt we
should be friends. I was right."
"Have you met a gentleman called Gavril Hitch Isaev in
Seoul?" asked Seryozha breathlessly, as they walked side by
side up the street.
"Isaev? He keeps a small but respectable hotel in Seoul,
and, curiously enough, I stayed there for a night or two,
since the Japanese hotel was full when we first arrived
or rather, it had only one suite disengaged, which was oc-
cupied by Sir Theo Mustard and valet."
Seryozha's dog bounced into Anna's kitchen, and when
Anna saw it, she thought, "Thank God, he has not gone
away forever, after all."
"Mamma," said Seryozha, "I have brought Mr. Wilfred
Chew from London."
"From London?" exclaimed Anna, and instantly left the
room. For she was still wearing only her cotton bodice and
petticoat, and there was a bottle-green velvet dress, sixteen
years old, waiting in a tin trunk for just such an occasion
as this.
She took twenty minutes dressing herself and frizzing her
hair, and as
—self-conscious, hopeful, and flushed—she
came to the open door of the living-room, she stood for a
moment outside and heard her husband saying to Seryozha
in Russian: "Tell him politely that we are poor and could
not possibly afford two yen a day above his keep. But tell
him that he shall share and share alike with you—he shall
be treated, in fact, like my own son, in addition to a little
"
salary of twenty-five sen a day
Anna tightened her lips and came in. She was flattered
£|J3 81 iJiJl
and astonished to see the brightening of Mr. Chew's
smooth, mobile face as he saw her.
"Ah, Mrs. Malinin, I presume/' he said. "It has seemed
long waiting for you, but ladies must be waited for—
I
remember this in London. I am so interested to hear that
you also know London. I have been for four years a law
student in London—Middle Temple. . . you of course
know Middle Temple—and I was called to the bar there
eight months ago."
"Ah yes, the bar of London," said Anna, eagerly. "I am
very ignorant of most London matters, but I knowof course
there are many bars."
Mr. Chew accepted this innocent remark as a joke so
readily that it might almost have been guessed that he had
made it himself more than once. When he smiled, Anna
noticed his solitary gold tooth and thought that it looked
like the royal box glittering in the middle of the row of
ordinary boxes at the opera. So she said: "And the opera of
London—oh, how happily I remember it! I have been to
the opera four times with a lady called Honorable Mrs.
Atkinson—there has been 'Siegfried'—'The Valkyrie'—
'Magic Flute' and 'La Boheme.'
"I also knew a family called Atkinson," said Wilfred
Chew. "Edward F. Atkinson, but I don't like him much
—such a conceited chap—
I worked in the chambers on
the same stairs for four months and he scarcely spoke. . .
simply because he was the son of a solor—naturally any-
"
body could get briefs in such circumstances
"To me," said Anna, after a partially smothered hiccough
which showed how deeply excited she was, "the scenery of
the opera is very, very happy, Mr. Chew—in such scenery
one has never been so unfortunate as to see all—do you
understand?—there is always a round the corner or an over
the hill which one has not seen. How very, very happy it is
to me, to know that there has been a round the corner—
UJ 82 jJU
that I have not seen—
even if it is only made with woods
and paints. England, to me, Mr. Chew, is a big, big round
the corner. . . . More happy than possible happiness—
yes, no?"
"Now there," said Mr. Chew, *'l should scarcely agree
with you entirely, though of course I have had many happy
hours in London. But to a young man carving out a career
the work was often hard, Mrs. Malinin, and English people
—with the exception of a gentleman like Reverend Mr.
Oswald Fawcett—
are nearly always snobs"
Anna, her burning eyes fixed upon his tooth, said: "Yes,
yes, Mr. Chew. And the pillars of this opera-house—do you
remember?—
all gold and twisted—
so" (for a moment
she seemed to think that she could twist her fat upraised
—
forefinger into an imitation of barley sugar)
'like . . .
like . . . pillars of that thing—how do you call it?—
horses-merrily-go-galloping-round on the Hampstead Heath.
These go-rounds are very, very good things, I think, but
Betti was being sick afterward in the hot tent.'*
Old Sergei and Seryozha sat back in their chairs, their
hands folded across their diaphragms, proud of their wife
and mother, listening hopefully to this loud and genial con-
versation, though they did not understand very much of it.
During a short check. Old Sergei said in Russian, "Mylove,
do you not think that Mr. Chew would be just the man
"
to
"Kensington Gardens, too, is good," said Anna, bound-
ing in her chair. "Each day, at half past eleven, Betti and
I have walked through the Kensington Gardens as far as
Queen Cleopatra's Needle"
Wilfred Chew started as if stung. "There is some mistake,
surely, Mrs. Malinin. Cleopatra's Needle is not in the
Kensington Gardens."
"Yes. But yes. Alittle spike in the middle of the Kensing-
ton Gardens."
£li!j 83 £|J3
"This is the Albert Memorial."
'Tcht, Mr. Chew! King Albert's Memorial is very well
known by me. I make no mistake. A very, very big spike—
King Albert in middle—bull—elephant—lady at corners.
It is all known by me."
"Nevertheless, Cleopatra's Needle is, beyond question,
on the Embankment of the river Thames, Mrs. Malinin."
"Tcht, tcht!"
"Anna my dear," said Old Sergei. "It has just occurred
to me that we might induce Mr. Chew"
"But I know the Kensington Gardens very, very good,
Mr. Chew. Each morning have I walked to that little spike,
"
builded in a pink stone, very shining
"Ladies always knowbest, Mrs. Malinin," said Mr. Chew,
"
archly. "But in this case
"
"Ah tschah! But I have seen
"Well, well . . . you ladies must have your own way.
Reverend Mr. Fawcett used to say, 'Always allow a lady the
courtesy of the last word, Wilfred.' So let us say Cleopatra's
Needlehad wings and flew every morning at half past eleven
to the Kensington Gardens to make her bow to you, Mrs.
Malinin."
Anna, only half understanding, rocked backward and for-
ward in restored satisfaction, patting her fat knees with
every forward swing. But as she did so she became secretly
more and more doubtful of the accuracy of her memory of
Cleopatra's Needle. Her pleased face clouded slowly as the
doubt crystallized, her rocking was gradually braked and
stilled by inward questionings. There was silence in the
room.
"Annitchka my dove," said Old Sergei, rapidly, in Rus-
sian. "Mr. Chew has just come from acting as guide to a
young English nobleman, and it has occurred to me that
we might persuade him to look after our Seryozha on this
"trip down to Seoul
im 84 £ili3
Anna sighed.
"I know you are not very anxious that he should go, my
love, but Mr. Chew's fortunate arrival must surely alter
your view to a certain extent. It almost seems as if he were
sent by God to us in our difficulty. He actually knows
Isaev—has been staying in his house. If I understand your
conversation rightly, he seems to know your friends, the
Honorable Atkinsons, in London, which must give you
pleasure. Also, it seems to me very probable that he is of
the same family as my old friend Colonel Chu Wen-chou
(whose father came from Canton also, you remember)
and"
Wilfred Chew, listening with bland blankness to the
Russian, caught the names. "Ha—Atkinson—Chu—
Isaev—
all this talk of families and mutual acquaintances.
... I was telling your husband, Mrs. Malinin—(in joke,
of course)—that he must remember that he is not seeking
for a tribe or family to go with his son, but simply for a
"
reliable companion—and that
"Oi, tcht!" said Seryozha in English. 'Tlease let my papa
be satisfied in the way he wishes. This talk of families is
good talk for him—
it makes him glad."
Anna sighed again, and heaved in her chair.
"It is natural," said Old Sergei, half apologetically, half
reproachfully, "that I should be glad to find that my son's
companion comes of an honest and good stock. I always re-
spected Colonel Chu and, although his father came from
Canton, the colonel was never seduced by Bolshevik in-
fluence, so rampant in that part of China. Anna my dove,
I am sure you agree with me that, all things considered,
this is an opportunity that should not be missed."
Anna's eyes were fixed on her son's face. Seryozha's
mouth was open and his face, unusually pale, was lighted up
with a half-incredulous hope. Anna imagined how that tense
white look would crumple up at a word of discouragement
flJJ 85 fiiil
from her. It would be like pricking his poor, silly, feverish,
puffed-up heart. After all, why shouldn't he go? she thought,
deliberately letting her rigid mind go limp. People went on
such journeys and returned; and if their mothers had feared
the worst for them beforehand, that in itself was a sort of
insurance that the worst was not to be. She began looking
forward to watching Seryozha's face, three minutes from
now, when she should have said yes. Now she only uttered
an ambiguous grunt.
'The only question is, the expense," said Old Sergei. He
turned to Wilfred Chew and said in English, "We poor
mans. Two yens every day too much. I pays twenty-five sens
every day. Also I pays all foods and beds."
Wilfred Chew smiled engagingly and shrugged his shoul-
ders, holding his head on one side, "Between gentlemen,
Mr. Malinin, there should be no bargaining. But surely one
yen a day, and all expenses, would not be too much to ask.
You must remember that I am an educated chap—not a
"
commonvulgar guide, so to speak
*'Speker shouted Anna, a sudden glare of inspiration
burning up the whole problem in her mind. "This spike in
Kensington Gardens is called Speke's Needle."
"Ha—Speke!" said Mr. Chew, faintly, for he had been
severely startled by his hostess's full-throated roar. "Ha!
no doubt, yes. . . Speke's Needle. ... A renowned
judge, of course, Speke.. .
."
The discussion came to a standstill for a moment, but
Anna, hermindnowcleared of distractions, was herkeen self
again. "One yen a day we have not got," she said, abruptly.
"You see, Seryozha, it is not your mother that prevents.
The thing is not possible. You know yourself what we have
and what we have not."
"Of course," said Old Sergei, in Russian. "If the interest
on mytwo hundred yen should by now have reached a con-
siderable sum, we should be able to afford to pay—
say
JU 86 IJIiJ
fifty sen a day now and, when the money was in our hands,
give Mr. Chew something extra, proportionate to the serv-
ices he will have rendered us/'
"If there will be more money for us in Seoul," said Ser-
yozha, to Chewin English, nerved by the crisis to speak thus
crudely in spite of his shyness, before a young man so su-
perior, "my father will give more money to you. He speak
fifty sen a day promise—
at the end more, perhaps/'
"My salary for acting as escort to Sii Theo Mustard"
began Wilfred Chew. Tlien, as he saw a mulish finality
written on the faces of all three Malinins, he added, "but
there, life is full of such contrasts. I will escort your son for
fifty sen a day and expenses, on the understanding that if
he obtains the money with interest from Mr. Isaev, I can
claim ten sen on every yen obtained over and above the two
hundred yen."
"Well . . . Annitchka?" said Old Sergei, faintly.
"I should have to wash out all three of his shirts," said
Anna, her eyes suddenly full of tears. "And I must have
time to patch the knee of his best trousers. . .
."
Seryozha remembered one of his mother's English idioms.
"Tschah! All this bibbing and tuckering. .
." he said.
Then, with a loud creaking yell of joy, he rushed into his
mother's arms.
•
MA m
• T*f«T«1 I 91 91 •!
mNMMNmm
CHAPTER SIX
Seryozha and Wilfred Chew began their journey in a
happy sunhght swimming with swallows. Neither Seryozha
nor Wilfred saw the birds. And indeed, birds are transpar-
ent, I think, like the safe anonymous shapes of sheep on
hillsides or policemen at city crossings; these things are part
of fitness; they are so native to the air that they become
glass to the attention. An eagle is different, of course; no
one ever looks through an eagle; a piece of the sky is re-
served for him, and he moves into his place as a king moves
to his throne, with every eye upon him.
*'l think it is three meters from this to that," said Ser-
yozha, becoming for a mom.ent an eagle, spreading his arms
to an imperial stretch and pointing his beak to the sun.
Unfortunately, his feet unexpectedly remained on earth and
tripped over a stone.
"Three meters is nothing for an eagle," said Wilfred, who
was thinking on rather a large scale today. He was feeling
exuberant because Anna had listened to him so gladly. Poor
Wilfred, everywhere a foreigner with too much to say,
living either with people who could not understand his
speech or with people who did not want to, might be said
1
iJlJJ 88 flli3
to be the one lonely resident of a spiritual city of Babel.
Not only was his world afflicted with a hopeless confusion
of tongues, but also, the towers of elaborate talk he built,
though always designed to reach heaven, only attained a
level high enough to give him a depressing view of his
audience scattering abroad beyond recall. But Anna had
shown herself a sort of honorary compatriot in his lonely
city; her understanding, linguistic and spiritual, had been
perfect. She had spread herself like a desert, as it were,
thirsty for the shadow of his high place. From time to time,
to be sure, she had blossomed forth with some trivial and
inadequate prattle about her own womanish conclusions
and experiences; nevertheless, the atmosphere, on the whole,
had been unusually light. Wilfred, that optimistic architect
of battlemented follies, had been for once free of the feel-
ing of straining to get his toppling themes buttressed up to
some kind of completion in the presence of strangers either
wholly untutored or else prepared for flight.
Wilfred and Seryozha felt as if they were walking back-
ward for a moment as they compared their progress with
the sweeping speed of the eagle's shadow across the valley.
But they marched stoutly on. Tlie river, broad, polished and
set in a pale bed thinly shaded with pink-twigged osiers, ran
beside them through the clear light. The whole broad
valley was so clearly lighted by the white sun that every
stone, tree, and village on the yellow-green mountains stood
out with the flat significance of such details in a good nine-
teenth-century chromo-lithograph.
The colors of the Koreans' clothes were like bright pins
all over the valley, catching at—almost scratching at—the
indifferent sight. Koreans in Kanto are worn by custom to
the same fine transparency as birds and other lovely and
common furnishings of the scene; they are to the eye what
the gentle ticking of a clock is to the ear. Yet today, since
it was a Korean holiday, the Korean wanderers were so gayly
fiJJ 89 lUJ
dressed as to catch even an accustomed eye. Favorite colors
were arsenic green, poison pink, apple green, and a cheap
crude blue—
all very unflower-like colors, yet they sowed
the roads and fields and paths with an effect of flowers. The
little Korean girls wore wide, semi-transparent, gaudy skirts
hung from the shoulders by embroidered braces—and they
wore nothing else. The little boys wore red-flowered silk
Eton jackets ending abruptly at the fifth rib—and they
wore nothing else. Decollete for girls down to the waist—
dejamhe for boys up to the navel. In either case, if the pur-
pose of clothes is to conceal, the purpose was most inade-
quately fulfilled; if the purpose is to decorate, decorated
indeed the wearers were.
The distant paths, plaiting, splitting, and raveling like
threads on the hillsides, invited the eye. Some paths look
as if they lead away and never come back, but these paths,
spotted with gay holiday-makers, seemed to lead in—
to
lead home—
or, at least, to lead out into the flowery sun-
light under promise of leading home again soon—home
to nights of good food, good digestion, good sleep, and good
wives. Comfortable little domestic paths, in spite of their
dancing informality.
Round every Korean grave—
-each a mere bunker on
a grass slope—
a group of merry descendants chatted,
laughed, and ate. It must be delightful for the dead to know
that the grassy lumps beneath which their bones lie are
rendezvous for joking, feasting friends—
are just extensions
of the scenes of their living hospitality, now made im-
mortal like their souls. It must be good for the lonely dead
to know that their names will never be a wet blanket on
laughter and horseplay, and that once a year they may count
on being hosts and householders once more.
"These heathens," said Wilfred Chew, "have no proper
respect for the dead. They don't appreciate the awful posi-
tion of a dead man after a life of heathenism and sin."
m 90 fijj
Seryozha thought a httle. It always irritated him to hear
any criticism of what was physically natural. "Let them be,
let them be/' he wanted to say. "Let them be—why—
simply because they are." But he could not remember any
English words that would express this feeling. "Nyet sin/'
he said, vaguely, waving his hand vaguely toward the sin-
ner-speckled hills.
"You mean," said Wilfred, who always felt it was his
business to explain to people what they meant, "that the
heathen cannot help their dreadful darkened condition, if
they have not been given any opportunity to see the light.
But, Mr. Malinin, every heathen now, I believe, has heard
the message of Christianity. Schools like the Wesleyan
Academy at Yueh-lai-chou—though not all, perhaps, quite
so excellent—
are everywhere. Devoted teachers of the
Word travel upon bicycles, donkeys. Ford's motor-cars,
trains, junks, steamboats, and Peking carts in all directions
among the heathen—though I admit that men of such
great saintlike influence as Reverend Mr. Oswald Fawcett
are rare. Look at my own case. At the age of thirteen I am
called to my father's side—myfather was a very wise man,
an official in the Sanitary Department of Canton, spending
the retirement of his well-earned old age at Yueh-lai-chou.
'English,' says my father, 'is the business language of China.
Christianity is a part of English. You shall learn English at
the Wesleyan Academy and so be fitted for a life full of
advantages. Christians have many advantages in this life.'
Reverend Mr. Oswald Fawcett, when I told him this,
laughed his usual merry, hearty laugh and said, 'Not so many
as in the life hereafter.' Be that as it may, look at the result
of my father's wise Christian ruling. Instead of being a
hopeless sinner and perhaps a mere merchant or clerk in
Canton, I am taught the Holy Bible by a man like the Rev-
erend Fawcett, as well as clean morals, manliness, mathe-
matics and a thorough grounding in English history and
fiffl 91 aa
literature, with special attention to the plays of William
Shakespeare. By this preparation and moral grounding I
am enabled to pass the London Matriculation ( 'Matric/ we
London scholars say), and to become a student in a London
Inn of Court. I am proposed by the well-known bencher,
Mr. Winkworth, K. C, and seconded by his renowned
colleague, Mr. Weston-North. I eat my dinners"
'Tou eat some dinner?" asked Seryozha, suddenly draw-
ing a pirozhok out of his pocket and sitting down to eat it.
"Dinner ... a most good plan."
A look of intense spiritual hunger came over Wilfred
Chew's face and he swallowed once or twice, as if calling
his useless words back into his throat from the unheeding
air. Anna had made a packet of rice-filled piiozhki for him
and he stood eating, swinging his weight from one foot to
the other, looking hungrily from Seryozha's face to the hills
and back again. Yet even utterance uncomprehended was
a relief to him, though it was rather like playing squash
racquets against oneself. After a moment, therefore, Wil-
fred began again to utter, with his mouth full, on a rather
lower note than before, as he watched Seryozha's face
wistfully for some possible freak of understanding.
'Tes, I eat my dinners. Twice I eat with three other men,
namely, Williams, Banks, and Feathers. Feathers invites
me—he is very pressing. He says: Tou must join our mess,
Mr. Chew, I will not take no for an answer.' So of course I
bow pleasantly and accept the politeness. WTien I sit down
among them, they say, Tou do not drink wine, Mr. Chew?'
I say, 'No, gentlemen, I have been brought up by Reverend
Mr. Oswald Fawcett to consider alcohol as a moral danger.'
Feathers, who was not really, I think, a moral man, says,
'Good egg! (this is a London expression of joy). That's just
as I thought,' he says; 'there'll be all the more moral danger
for us.' Of course he was merely joking. Nevertheless, they
did not invite meto take wine again, shewing that mywords
ffl 92 filiJ
made an impression of moral determination on them. In-
deed, Mr. Banks once said to me, 'It has meant a good deal
to us today, Mr. Chew, to have a teetotaller in our mess.'
Seryozha was familiar with the English word "moral" by
now, for he had known Mr. Chew three days.
"It is pity you have not seeing our singing girls of Chi-
tao-kou," he said, happily, feeling that he was at last in the
swim of this flood of information. "Some are not too bad.
The little Matvievna—her skin is most white. Before, when
I was young, I thinked, I shall marry her, but after, I find
yist only singing girl. Amost merry girl."
"Christians should avoid such women," said Wilfred
Chew, seriously. "They are a moral danger. If you find self-
control difficult, Mr. Malinin, you should pray—
or perhaps
marry."
"Oi! marry. .
." said Seryozha, spurting out crumbs of
piiozhki as he laughed. "I have money nyet. I give all to my
mamma."
His heart, however, warmed to Wilfred in response to
this tribute to his maturity. Certainly, he thought, once a
man is safely away from his home, the world takes him for
the man he is.
"One could marry with a certain amount of worldly wis-
dom and still remain a Christian," said Wilfred Chew. "For
instance, there is a very delightful young lady of your own
race
—Miss Ostapenko—who lives at Mi-san, near Seoul.
Sir Theo Mustard and myself, when motoring from Seoul
on an expedition, asked at Miss Ostapenko's father's home
for some water for the radiator, and were invited to stay to
tea."
"Ostapenko. . . ? Howis her father called?"
"She is Miss Tatiana Ostapenko. Herfather is called Pavel
Ostapenko, Esquire."
"Tscht! Tatiana Pavlovna. She marries nobody. Alexander
Petrovitch Weber speaked about her. She is many times
ffl 93 £|li3
betrothed; she is many times saying this, saying that; she is
not good for mans. Alexander Petrovitch say she has be-
trothed seven times—he say that Tatiana is married, per-
haps, to a devil. Devil is inside her. He speak so. He speak,
yist better to be dead nor to be betrothed to Tatiana Pav-
lovna."
"Oh, that is ridiculous! I noticed a sort of shyness about
her, but who knows what is in the heart of a pure young
girl? She is certainly extremely pure. And perhaps of an ice-
like nature. Yet she is considered beautiful. As a Chinese I
should not think her beautiful, but as a Londoner, I can see
that she is a little like the late Queen Alexandra (widow of
the late King Edward Seventh) in features. Also, Mr. Ma-
linin, she will have a fortune. It is good for a Christian to
make friends a little with the mammon of unrighteousness,
though not, of course, to the point of serving two masters."
"It is more good not to be dead," said Seryozha. "I like
better to be alife with Sonia Matvievna nor to be dead with
Tatiana Pavlovna. I have speak much with Alexander Petro-
vitch Weber these last days in Chi-tao-kou. He speak like
this: Tatiana Pavlovna not good. She is like dead. Withher
a man must not be alife. She make a man dead, like a devil.'
Alexander Petrovitch speak also: 'She is finish of me. She has
taken away my life.' He was nice chap, too. I hope he will
soon be alife again. I speak to him about Sonia Matvievna.
He speak, 'So? She is easy to love? So?'
Seryozha mimicked young Weber's long-drawn-out "So-
0-0-0?" with a question sound at the end of it. "I speak: In-
deed yes, she is most easy indeed. More better nor a devil.'
And so I think. My papa speak: 1 think this girl Tatiana
Ostapenko is perhaps child of Pavel Nicholaievitch Osta-
penko, the cousin of mypapa's uncle's wife. Pavel Nicholaie-
vitch always has been bad boy—his child is perhaps bad
also,' my papa speak. 'Seryozha, do not be making any visit-
ings to such bad people,' my papa speak. I am the one son
i!iia 94 aa
of mypapa and my mamma—
I wish not to be malced dead
by devils. I do not love devils/'
"There are cures for devils," said Wilfred Chew, thought-
fully. As he spoke, a vague picture of banners and smells
disinfecting devil-haunted Chinese houses floated before his
eyes. Almost immediately this picture was replaced by one
of himself bringing back a gloriously enriched Seryozha to
the threadbare, anxious little house in Chi-tao-kou. A Ser-
yozha married to a beautiful heiress. Old Sergei would surely
forgive disobedience that led to such a result. And what
about the agreement? Ten sen on e\'ery yen over and above
two hundred yen, he thought—and wished he had it in
writing. Then he thought, Russians pay matchmakers, they
say, very much as Chinese do; would not old Ostapenko be
prepared to make it worth a man's while to find a good
husband for a girl with seven failures behind her?
Wilfred Chew was quite without guile. His Christian up-
bringing had really planted a kind of charity to all men in his
naturally affectionate heart. It was part of his vanity to be
good—not only to seem good. He would most certainly
have been very sorry to disappoint the Almighty in His
(doubtless) high expectations of Wilfred Chew. Still, it
was also part of his vanity to be prosperous—and surely
this was also part of the Almighty's plan for him. For in-
stance, Wilfred's genuine love and reverence for the Rev-
erend Oswald Fawcett had not prevented him from mak-
ing a good profit, on commission, out of Mr. Fawcett's pas-
sion for buying trashy brass "curios" from the shopkeepers
of Yueh-lai-chou. Why should it, indeed? There is so often
a point in a Chinese deal at which the seller sells for a little
more than he had hoped and the buyer buys for a little less.
A fraction of that little less—that little more—
is the nat-
ural prerogative of the mutual friend, be he Christian or
heathen. This was so much a commonplace in Wilfred's
mind that he had never even dreamed of considering him-
flffl 95 l!i23
self a less disinterested disciple of his reverend idol for mak-
ing pocket money out of the latter's ignorance of the value
and quality of brass. So many v^orshipers have profited out
of the weakness of idols, after all. But of course Wilfred did
not think of it in this way. Hesimply wanted to be not only
a good Christian, but also a good business man.
He was already quite fond of Seryozha. After all, the boy
was of conveniently silent habit, and even, occasionally,
seemed impressed by what was said to him. Wilfred was by
now for the most part resigned to not expecting much more
of an obtuse world than this. He was like the secretary of an
impoverished charitable society—satisfied if he got one am-
biguous acknowledgment to a score of appeals.
The piiozhki were finished. The teeth of the travelers be-
ing nowat rest, their feet could plod on. Wilfred wisely said
no more about the heiress of Mi-san, for the present. His
English law experience had taught him that there were lim-
its to the persuasive powers of the voice, and that explana-
tion was sometimes better dumb. Wilfred spent the after-
noon trying to give his companion a rough summary of Ro-
man law. Constitutional law. Criminal law, and Real Prop-
erty and Conveyancy. He was just passing on to the material
of the final examination—Commonlaw. Evidence and Pro-
cedure, and Equity, to the tune of a low song from Seryo-
zha—when they realised that Pa-tao-kou lay below them—
the village in which they intended to spend the night. They
had just climbed over a shoulder of cliff that overhung the
river. The roofs of the Korean village lay like a shuffle of
brown leaves beside the river. The sandbanks in the broad
river looked almost the color of violets in the late night—
all
the subdued color of the valley, indeed, was overlaid with
this smoky violet glaze. The early preparations for sunset
were nobly ungorgeous. The sky was a striped bursting con-
fusion of steel and silver—gleaming silver spilled down
from a low cloud-masked sun in concentrated pools on far
fllfl 96 M
gorges. Themostbrilliant concentration of all was hiddenby
a steep broken crag a dozen miles away, so that the crag was
backed by a diamond glow, though its topmost rocks were
brushed by clouds. The glow behind it was like the radiance
by which one might know a holy city—or like the mist of
white spray that rises from the unseen deep pool that re-
ceives a waterfall.
Seryozha was veryhot and looked the hotter for the foren-
sic coolness of his Chinese friend. Sweat patched Seryozha's
brown smocked blouse, his yellow hair was lank and damp,
the sockets of his eyes were polished with sweat like well-
greased ball-bearings. Yet he led his companion at a cheer-
ful run down the dusty zigzag that sloped to river and village
level. From the bottom of the hill the track into the village
ran between the river and a narrow deep-set irrigation ditch.
Along the track a bullock cart plodded to meet the travelers.
The cart's wheels splayed out like knock-kneed legs; there
was no room even for the cart's own stunted shadow be-
tween the wheel and the ditch. Slow floating leaves and
sticks in the ditch met and swam through the cart's shadow,
as ships might meet a storm cloud. The Korean driver of the
cart was asleep in the bottom of the shovel-shaped, woven-
withy basket that formed the body of the vehicle. Wilfred
Chew, accustomed to the implacable demands of traffic in
cities, prepared to jump the ditch on to a dike that bordered
a ricefield. There seemed to be no other alternative. But
Ser}'ozha had no respect for wheels or hoofs as opposed to
the pedestrian's rights; he was also still under the way of his
rush downhill. He flapped his arms like a kite and with a
loud "Boo-boo!" threw himself toward the bullock. His dog
joined in the charge with a supporting shout of "Boo!" The
astonished bullock, without altering its sullen and medita-
tive expression, completely lost its head. After curtsying
wildly right, left, and right again, it swerved, sprawling, aside
and jumped into the river, choosing, it seemed, dishonor
flffl 97 lai
rather than death. The jolt of the wheels, whisking over the
humped bank of the road, detached the basket body of the
cart from its chassis. The driver, still asleep, remained curled
up in the basket on the water's brink, like the infant Moses
ready for a rather improbable Pharaoh's daughter, while the
bullock, dragging only a wooden skeleton on wheels,
ploughed up and down in the shallows. Its world had come
to an end. The string in its nose was loose; there was no
cruel safe god to tell it what to do. It shrugged the yoke
from its shoulders and, now naked and unattached, swam
hysterically out into deep water.
Seryozha, doubled up on the road, squealed and cracked
with laughter. His dog, always glad of a chance to show itself
amphibious, pursued the enemy into the water, shrieking
with delight. Acrowd of Korean and Chinese men and boys
was instantly present, laughing, arguing, and wailing in vigor-
ous tenor voices. "Eck-eck-eck!" they cried invitingly to the
bullock, but the harassed beast, trying to escape the dog,
swam outward, swam inward, and was caught by a strong
current and carried downstream. It would have given one of
its horns, now, to find firm ground under its feet and a firm
burden behind its tail, but it did not knowhow. Staring eyes
upcast, nose wide open, curving about foolishly in the cur-
rent, it swam right and left, right and left, on the strong
dragging current. All the villagers ran downstream after it.
Only the driver remained, asleep in the basket. Seryozha
stood over him, laughing still. His dog, rashly refusing to re-
linquish the chase, was now helpless, too, being snatched
downriver like a hooked fish. Seryozha went on laughing;
his dog was expected to look after itself, though by now it
looked a mere flea on the great pale body of the river.
Wilfred Chew stared scornfully down at the sleeping Ko-
rean. "Ai!" shouted Wilfred in the man's ear. "Ai—
ai—
ai!" Hebowedhimself down, almost pressing his nose to the
small black horsehair top-hat of the sleeper and screamed
I
£iJJ 98 jJIiJ
*'Air It was alien to Wilfred's Chinese instincts to slap or
shake the man. But Seryozha knocked the poor fellow's lit-
tle hat off. This effected a slight movement of the eyelids
of the carter. Communication was nowheld up, as usual, by
the lack of a commonlanguage. But, gallant as ever, Wilfred
wrote in large Chinese characters on a page in his notebook
"Bullock—Floats—Away." This composition was flaunted
before the twitching eyelids of the semi-conscious bereaved
man.
Opposite the village, the bullock and the dog ran aground
on the same sandbank. "Eck-eck-eck!" yawped the watchers
in honeyed voices. Only a side strand of the river divided
the sandbank from the mainland. The water flowed gently
here, and both the marooned animals could have negotiated
it easily. But the struggle and strangle of their arrival had
frightened both; the bullock had too little imagination and
the dog too much, to allow them to contemplate a new
aquatic venture for the present. The bullock, still feebly
shaking its horns at the silver emptiness round it, stood
drooping, pufEng, blowing its nose, splaying it legs, firmly
rooted on all that seemed left of its old, obscurely known,
obscurely trusted world. Thedog, sobered and wet, squatted,
panting, on the furthest possible promontory of the sand-
bank from the bullock. It was sick of bullocks. Obviously
it was thinking, 'Tord! what a companion to be marooned
with on a desert island!"
"Come," said Seryozha, after whistling indifferently to
his dog and being interrupted by a new giggle—though his
cheeks felt quite strained with giggling already. "Vot hotel?
Let us enter."
As they passed the crowd of men, women, and children
on the shore—now some forty strong—
all shouting, "Eck-
eck-eck!" the bullock on the sandbank suddenly decided to
settle down, a bovine imperialist claiming kingship over a
new-found land, with only one subject—and that one a
ua 99 ija
rebel. The bullock knelt down clumsily on its forelegs first,
and remained for a few puzzled, uncomfortable seconds
with its behind tilted up, feeling densely that something
still remained undone. Then it remembered its hindlegs,
and folded them awkwardly. It sat like a carpet bag on its
wet bald island, looking through its thick eyes across the
water at the crowd of yelping gods. The dog ran to and fro
on the bank, wagging its tail winningly at the river, as if
hoping to persuade the obliging stream to part its waters
and leave a dry crossing for a poor dog's exhausted feet.
Seryozha and Wilfred entered the inn and threw their
bundles on the kang. The proprietor, with a gray stubble of
hair on a thin head, sitting on his haunches in the middle
of his mud floor, smoking a very slender pea-size-bowled
pipe, bowed as they came in. His wife, tottering across from
the fire on stiff bound feet, brought each of the guests a
cup of tea. The door became entirely blocked by spectators,
coming from the sight of a Bullock on a Sandbank to enjoy
the finer spectacle of Strangers Drinking Tea. The smell
was very thick, but smoke partly drowned it. It was not a
very inviting end to a day's journey, but Seryozha, it must
be remembered, had never known a real hotel. Hehad never
seen a bathtub, a bellboy, a real brass bed, a parquet floor,
a poster advertising a seaside resort, a revolving doorway, a
lift, or an Axminster carpet. He had never eaten either a la
carte or table dhotCy or leaned against a mahogany bar.
Fleas he was accustomed to, bugs he disliked, lice he drew
the hue at—but he had never within his memory lived in
surroundings in which any of these intruders could cause
any considerable surprise. The Pa-tao-kou inn, therefore,
seemed to him as tolerable as, say, the Red Lion, Bobble-
under-Ouse, might seem to the average commercial traveler
—
a very so-so place, affording at least the luxury of a good
deal to grumble mildly at.
Yet for Seryozha there was something decidedly wrong
m 100 aa
with the place for the moment. A blankness in the region
of his ankle-bone ... a silence ... no panting in the
background of the hearing... no wagging in the corner
of the eye. The panting of Seryozha's dog was to him what
the ticking of a clock is to another man; he did not notice
it when it was there, but felt uneasy without it. He walked
to the doorway. The dog and the bullock, meek and re-
signed, still passively colonized the sandbank. The last
spears of the sunset pricked the river.
"I am hot," said Seryozha, wiping his flushed face with
his sleeve. '1 shall swim in this river." It would be bad for
the dog, he somehow felt, if he admitted that its plight
mattered to him.
"Have you brought a bathing costume with vou?" asked
Wilfred.
"Schtor
**A bathing costume? Agarment for swimmingpurposes?"
"Schtor
Wilfred clicked his throat. Seryozha pushed his way out
through the crowded door and stumbled down over the
rocks to the river's edge. He pulled off his clothes with a
cheerful frankness and walked into the water. The crowd
of villagers followed him from the inn, their eyes never
leaving him. They added to their numbers, they shouted for
their friends and families to join them—especially at the
moment when his astonishing nakedness burst upon them
—but they could not leave him in order to advertise the
entertainment, for fear lest they might miss some item
which might never be repeated. And their enthusiasm was
rewarded. About seventy of them were able to watch a
spectacle that had never before been seen in Pa-tao-kou—
the spectacle of a White Man Swimming in the River.
The water climbed up Seryozha's body as he waded
deeper and deeper. The garment of delicious coldness, as it
wrapped itself higher and higher about him, seemed to be
m 101 m
piped by a wire of almost-pain, a steel hair of ice or fire,
climbing up his legs and his body. His thirsty skin gloried.
He threw himself flat in the water, his open mouth just
held above the surface. He felt strangely level with the
world's floor. All perspective changed to fit eyes only six
inches from world level instead of the usual six feet. He saw
the darkening sandbanks like clouds, the bullock and the
dog like giants, wild geese resting on far distant sandbanks
like tall electric gray ghosts.
"Mr. Chew! Mr. Chew!" Seryozha's voice came with a
curious clang across the water to the inn.
Wilfred came rather nervously out on to the shore, but
seeing that he need not yet see that Seryozha was naked—
since six-sevenths of that nakedness was modestly submerged
—helooked relieved and shouted thinly in reply.
"Mr. Chew," called Seryozha, ploughing this way and
that, "tell them—
yist some fishes in their nets. I see a
jumping." A thin this-way-and-that bristle of poles, sup-
porting fishing nets against the cunent, straggled in the
middle of the side stream.
Poor Wilfred felt almost a fool. However competent one
may feel to address a jury, it is a fact that one is not trained
at the English bar to act as communicatingmedium between
naked fellow-men fifty yards away, and peasant compatriots
with whom—in spite of their nationality—
one has no
word of common language. Nevertheless, Wilfred patiently
jotted down a few hieroglyphics in his notebook and showed
the paper to his Manchurian host. The host, after breathing
loudly yet affably for a moment on the message, sketched
a dozen characters in reply.
"He says the nets are not yet cleared," shouted Wilfred,
self-consciously. "They are usually examined after sun-
down."
"I will examinate in a minute," shouted Seryozha. Wil-
fred averted his eyes as Seryozha, tipped with sunburn, be-
ffl 102 m
gan to walk up the far shallows to the sandbank, looking
like an ivory saint on which coarse copper extremities had
been stuck as a blasphemous joke. The dog threw itself upon
him; cries and barkings of joy clanged across the water. The
light was growing very quickly dimmer now. Outlines that
were sure at one moment must be guessed at in the next,
then believed in with the heart of faith, and finally only re-
membered.
Seryozha was fairly clear to the spectators as he roused
the bullock from its rest. The bullock's behind rose first.
Then it indulged in its usual pause, trying to remember
what came next. But as Ser}^ozha rushed at it with a face-
tious cry, its forelegs were inspired and straightened them-
selves with a plunge. The worried creature took to the water
once more, abandoning its new kingdom without wagging
a horn. Twilight blurred it; it was there—
it was here—
no,
it was there—
it was suddenly much nearer than any one
had expected, splashing meekly up out of shallow water
toward the village.
Ser}'Ozha could be heard whistling to his dog, exhorting
it with a kindly curse. Then there was a gentle flipping
noise of swimming. The dusk drew veils across the white
blurred water.
Suddenly there was a noise of turbulent water, a squeal—
"Oooo-eeee!" from Seryozha, and then bubblings andchurn-
ings and snortings only.
"What has occurred?" quavered Wilfred. "Mr. Malinin
—
are you involved in some calamity?"
A snorting as of restricted fountains, waterspouts, and
whirlpools, was the only answer. The sound, coming across
calm water, had a brittle, urgent quality. Then a bubbling
squeal from Seryozha. 'Tist big fish!"
'Tou must return to shore immediately, Mr. Malinin,"
wailed Wilfred, walking excitedly to the river's edge and
Bl 103 m
pawing the sand like a thwarted horse. 'Tour parents would
highly disapprove.. .
."
The bubbhng and churning continued. Seryozha's dog
came ashore near Wilfred, and began barking anxious in-
junctions in the direction of the struggle. A few half-for-
gotten, almost atavistic, Cantonese curses burst from behind
Mr. Chew's English gold tooth. The words were like dark
unheard-of deepsea creatures being churned to the public
surface by some profound convulsion of nature. "Return—
return/* he wailed, trying to feel English again.
And suddenly, out of smoke-colored blankness, Seryozha
returned. With a sudden loud breathless laugh he walked
out of the water, towering tall in the dusk, clasping a large
fish to his stomach. The fish cramped itself in curves from
side to side, goggling voiceless o-o-o-s at the sky.
"Yist this most big fish catched outside the net," gasped
Seryozha. 'The nets have catched him by his skin. He has
bited me."
He threw the fish on the rocks, where it whipped and
lashed itself about, taut and terrible, mouthing its suffocated
appeal. "I think," said Seryozha, pulling his trousers on,
"that we shall soon be biting him. Fkuzna! Good biting,
yes—no?"
"I did not know," said Wilfred Chew, examining the
dying fish gravely, "that salmon could be plucked out of
rivers by hand in this way. In England, I have heard, people
fish for such fish with tame flies tied to rods."
Seryozha spouted river water out of his mouth, hawking
crudely in his throat. He then sucked his bleeding finger
and spat a little diluted blood. "In China," he said, shrug-
ging himself and dancing a little to make his clothes hang
easily on his wet body, "salmons are rare to be caught so,
round their waist. Never before, I think. This was a mis-
fortune to salmon—the net have catched such little cracks
m 104 m
of his skin—so." He touched the straining gills and then
stood up and looked down, feeling, as he always felt after
such deeds were done, that he had spoiled a joke. Asmiling
salmon in the water had become solemn and sorry now on
land—because of him. "He bited me," he murmured in
doubtfulness and obstinacy. "Now I shall be biting him."
"Such a fish would indeed make a successful dish," said
Wilfred, who had no such qualms. He did not really know
that animals were alive. To him they were either ambulant
food or else inferior substitutes for wheels. Sometimes they
were just things with a smell, like dogs. "Yet, Mr. Malinin,
legally the fish does not belong to us."
Seryozha began arguing with the innkeeper, whose nets,
it seemed, had originally detained the fish. Tlie fish, one
gathered, was not for sale at all; perhaps the innkeeper had
been considering having it stuffed for his wife's delight;
perhaps he would have given it to the pigs. Seryozha, how-
ever, expressed the opinion that the fish should not only be
sold to him, but sold very cheap, since he had gone to the
trouble of bringing it out of the water (thus saving the inn-
keeper a trip in his boat), andhad, in addition, been actually
injured by the fish. Seryozha suggested that the innkeeper
was lucky not to be asked to pay for the damage caused by
his dangerous and uncontrolled fish. It then appeared that
the fish, on second thoughts, might be sold as supper for the
travelers—but at an immense price. Argument continued.
The price began shrinking, like a flower from which the
petals were being plucked. I buy it
—
I buy it not—
I sell it
—
I sell it not. . . . Finally Seryozha said, "I have buy the
half of this fish for eighty sen."
"Which half?" asked Wilfred.
"Is this important—which half?" exclaimed Seryozha,
surprised but willing to be informed.
"Very important," answered Wilfred, judicially.
A new argument began between Seryozha and the inn-
l!ffi| 105 flffl
keeper. After about ten minutes Seryozha said, "I have buy
the behinder half of the fish for seventy-five sen. The before
half shall cost ninety sen."
'The behind is better for our purpose," said Wilfred.
*Tou can clean the fish and I will cook it."
The fish was divided by lantern-light, on the inn kang,
in the presence of about thirty witnesses.
'Take the heart and the hver and the gall," said Wilfred,
"and put them up safely."
"Nyet good," said Seryozha, wrinkling his nose at the
mess in question.
'Tlease do as I advise," said Wilfred, sharply. 'It is most
important."
Seryozha, making a slightly mutinous noise in the back
of his nose, wrapped the heart, the liver, and the gall of the
fish in a piece of newspaper. 'It shall smell," he said.
"Some smells are good."
"This smell nyet."
"Goodness is a comparative term."
"Oi-oi!" said Seryozha.
The fish, as Wilfred began to cook it, became a kind of
trysting-place for all the delicacies of the village. Water
chestnuts, garlic, sweet corn, peppers, young greens, tender
white roots were brought in by business-like outsiders and
bought by Wilfred for a few sen. The smell of cooking be-
came a smell that ought certainly not to be omitted from
Paradise.
Whatwould heaven be like, in fact, without happy empty
stomachs and the smell of a good supper getting ready?
thought Seryozha, as he sat in the doorway and watched
the stars of heaven. A half-moon was rising above the rice-
fields; its reflection swam like a fish in the water of the rice-
fields, appearing and disappearing, striped and coy, among
the blades of rice—
a fish swimmingvery deeply and secretly.
There was enough light to show the rice, bleached of its
fSSi 106 £iJ3
jewel-like green, all upright, all still, brushing the sight up-
ward like soft fur. Softer than the softest fur, pearly pale
like a Persian kitten's fur.
Seryozha stared at the lovely world, feeling cooler and
cooler after his hot busy day, thinking of nothing. Yet all
his senses, all his limbs and members, were straining after
rapture; his ears were open for a great harmony; his eyes for
some light they would never see; his tongue and his throat
were tense to utter some unspeakably true word; his feet on
tiptoe for a leap beyond the starriest athlete's dream; his
stomach was hungry for some super-food, his sex sense ach-
ing for nothing less than a goddess. The moon and the stars
seemed like little seeds of some stupendous flower—seeds
sterilized, embalmed in a coffin built of the limiting sub-
stance of space and thought. Seryozha panted, stirred, panted
again, spat.... "I am hungry," he said uncertainly, after
some time, turning to Wilfred.
'The fish is now prepared," said Wilfred, glittering with
the excitement of success.
The fish was indeed good. Seryozha drank some samshu
with it. "I wish there is a singing girl in this village," said
Seryozha. From time to time his chewing was checked by
a surge of silly memory in his mind, that made him clasp
his stomach in an ecstasy of giggle and blurt a high cracking
ha-ha into his dish. Then he found that he was sitting on
the newspaper packet that contained the heart, gall, and
liver of the fish.
"Ah, tschah!" he exclaimed, annoyed. "Mr. Chew, to
what use is the heart and the liver and the gall of this fish?"
"You remember," said Wilfred, "we were talking about
devils. Well, the smell of the heart and liver of such a fish
is a cure for devils. If a devil or an evil spirit trouble any
one, we must make a smelly smoke of these things before
the man or woman, and the party shall be no more vexed."
"What party?" asked Seryozha, stupidly.
m 107 m
"Well ... a cold woman, for instance/' said Wilfred,
after buzzing dubiously to himself through his teeth for a
moment. "Coldness in a woman means that a devil is in
her, and the devil can be frightened away by any husband
that takes proper precautions/'
"Ai-ai!" exclaimed Setyozha, feeling that he was acquir-
ing useful knowledge. "Inside such women yist devils!
Tcht! tcht! So here is magic—
to make smells against
devils. Mr. Chew, is this Wesleyan magic, yes—no?"
"It has nothing to do with religion," said Wilfred, stut-
tering a little in confusion, as though the Reverend Oswald
Fawcett had laid a hand on his shoulder. "Religion is one
thing, medicine is another. Chinese medicine is one of the
most ancient and profound studies in the world. Western
science has proved more and more the real wisdom behind
Chinese medicine."
"Oi—medicine!" sighed Ser^'ozha, nodding several times
and thinking of castor oil. "I understand. Yist medicine,
nyet magic. You know such plenty Wesleyan things, Mr.
Chew,I have forgotten you know also Chinese things."
"Well, every Chinese knows from early childhood about
the devils that obsess human beings. No religious education
can alter that knowledge. And also we know it from the
Bible, too. The apostles were taught to drive devils out."
"But with smells nyet," said Seryozha, not sceptically, but
anxiously. He enjoyed acquiring unusual knowledge.
"With smells is one way," said Wilfred, firmly. "Devils
cannot live in smelly smoke. In the western hemisphere
also, in old-fashioned times, Papists burned those who did
not accept their faith. For the same reason, I think. They
burned the body, and so the devils, not liking the smell, fled
away. But now, though Christians may not burn the body,
there is nothing to forbid them from stinking devils out."
"Indeed nyet," agreed Seryozha. "It is all most wise. I
shall remember. The heart and the liver of a salmon—
yes?
tS^ 108 fiJ3
But the gall—
it is not a right smell, yes—no? Shall I not
then throw away this gall? Yist to no use."
"The gall is extremely useful, too/' said Wilfred. "It
cures blindness." He was raking away in his memories of
the servants in his father's compound at Canton.
"Blindness!" cried Seryozha. "Mypapa is blind."
"Some blindness/' said Wilfred, cautiously, "is incurable.
Other forms can be cured by surgical operations. But a
Chinese doctor once told my old nurse that out of one
hundred cases of blindness in his town, he was able to cure
ninety-two by a course of treatment that involved a mas-
sage of the eyeball with the putrefying gall of a fish."
"Oi! Yoi! Yoi!" said Seryozha, astounded. "Ninety-two.
It is very many. I shall hold this in mymind."
And he kept the lucky sticky little parcel closely beside
him on the kang. But he did not, that evening, hold any-
thing very much in his mind. A tingling, humming restful-
ness spread over his body; noble aspirations, happily at-
tainable, surged in his contented brain; he felt that he had
two pairs of eyes—
one seeing charm and beauty in the
watching brown faces of the coolies at the door, the other
recognizing dreams and secrets in the shapes of shadow, the
angles of the smoky little room. His head recovered with a
wrench from a slow pendulum droop that he had not
noticed had begun. Helay downwith his head on his bundle
on the kang. His feet must have dreamed they were walk-
ing again, for he woke with a jolting sense of stumbling over
something. "A little stone/' he thought, drowsily, "with a
devil in it." Then his sleeping still feet went on secretly
walking—walking—walking—throb—throb—throb—
carrying his comfortable body into darkness.
/MA M
•T*T«T*1 /••¥•¥•
CHAPTER SEVEN
Tatiana's mother, Varvara Alexeievna Ostapenko, sat
in her garden, embroidering silk in bright colors. Varvara
was a tall woman, thin and melancholy, with a dark birth-
mark on one cheek. She had a slow and anxious awkward-
ness of body; she held her head up often, as though listen-
ing, walked on tiptoe, and when, as now, she rested, never
leaned back for more than a few seconds. A few seconds
slackening and then again there she would be, listening,
with her face up, as though expecting a call.
Thegarden, which had been made by their Japanese land-
lord, seemedbuilt, fitted together, rather than grown. Curves
of asymmetrical disciplined branches looped from sky to
ground; the green in-bent horizon of the garden looked like
handwriting against the dazzling sky. A young reddening
maple, a pine, a Japanese cherry tree, and a stunted self-
conscious cedar laid down careful shadows at one another's
feet in a sort of cold courtliness. There were no flowers ex-
cept Michaelmas daisies frothing in a mauve mist over the
brim of a streaked glazed blue urn in a corner of the garden.
Flying seed-pods, gossamers and birds seemed like untidi-
nesses in the air of a garden where even the shadows were
jJJJ 110 i5U
studied. The September heat of the plain boxed in the
garden as though in a glass case.
A thread of sound like a flute—the sound of Tatiana
whisthng—from somewhere in the house, seemed to run
like a rill of coolness through the garden.
'Tanya whistles like a boy/' thought Varvara. She im-
agined Tatiana as the girl must look as she ironed in the
washing-shed outside the house—whistling in time with
her ironing. "She must be hot, though," thought Varvara.
"Tliere is no draught in the shed." She imagined the light
diamond mustache of tiny drops that appeared always on
Tatiana's upper lip when she was hot—a little delicate hint
of heat that, in that still girl, took the place of the raw flush,
the bloated mouth, the hair askew, the stare-eyed goggle
that in so many other women and men are the symptoms
of over-heating.
The three members of the Ostapenko family were always
very conscious one of another. Their craving that each
should be justified, even when wrong, that each should be
worthy of each and appear worthy even when unworthy,
that none should be hurt or humiUated, even when deserv-
ing of rebuff, amounted to a kind of chronic soreness of
heart. They all ahiiost hated and quite loved one another
—
savage in the disappointment of their own hopes of one
another, and savage in their anger against outsiders for being
disappointed. They had an overbearing family egoism; they
felt as if they were set apart, as if they should be judged by
a standard different from that to which other families con-
form. Each thought the other two, for instance, more
beautiful than ordinary beauty; even Varvara's birthmark
seemed to her husband and daughter a sort of hallmark of
queer beauty. Only Pavel Ostapenko felt real vanity about
himself; Varvara and Tatiana each felt it for the other two.
Jn themselves they were more proud of the things they did
l!lll3 111 ffl
not do very well than they were about their gifts. With one
half of her mind Varvara knew that her designs for her em-
broidery were not worth the exquisite stitching she put into
them. The designs were childish and ungainly—not simple
enough to be primitive, not clever enough to be sophisti-
cated. Criticism of her designs, therefore, could make her
tremble with anger, and pointed praise of her stitching was
almost equally humiliating. She knew—and refused to ad-
mit—that she was an interpreter, not a creator, in every-
thing, but she refused to be praised for anything less than
creation.
In the same way, Tatiana's only vanity was her whistle.
It was sweet and most flexible and versatile; she could give
it either the ogling quality of the saxophone or the cold
veiled purity of the flute. It was always impeccably ac-
curate. Her ear heard words in the air which, running
through her senses, not through her brain, came out as
tunes through her lips—wandering, passing, blind tunes
that never went forward and never came back. It was a
foolish and tiny skill, much more akin to a bird's song than
a human sound; the sound mixed lightly with the cooing
of doves and the whistling of larks—
it had none of the in-
terrupting, creative quality of most human melody. Tatiana
did not feel that she should be applauded for her whistling,
but she herself enjoyed it intensely. It was very close and
clear in her own ears and filled up all the lonely space about
her. She heard it almost as though it were space singing, not
herself, and she looked forward to it whenever she set her-
self to work with her hands in an empty place. She valued
this knack of hers far more than she valued her straight and
vivid beauty. She had grown weary now of having her
beauty praised, since such praise was always the prelude to
a demand—
to one of the dangerous approaches she
dreaded.
tSi 112 M
There was a side gate to the garden, opening under a
twirl of tufted pine branch. By the care with which the
latch was lifted Varvara knew that her husband, Pavel, was
a little drunk but not very. Varvara looked at him with a
sourness that came of expectations disappointed. The trou-
ble was that she had invented a Pavel Ostapenko for her-
self, to which the actual Pavel seldom conformed. She was
a Procrustean wife.
Pavel looked uneasily at his wife as he pulled at his little
red beard. He used his beard as though it were a kind of
tab by which to pull his mouth open; tugging at his beard,
he pulled his jaw down—snapped it up again—
open—
shut—
open—showing fine teeth and an uneasy tongue.
"I have some news," he said, looking down at his wife,
rather relieved to be about to put his uneasiness and rancor
into words.
Varv^ara had decided deliberately to sulk a little. She felt
that a cold silence now might make him drink one glass
less next time.
'1 have heard something," he began again, "that makes
me as uncomfortable and guilty as though it were my own
fault. Oh, Varitchka—that poor boy, Sasha Weber. . . .
I was fond of him. He has cut his throat."
"Sasha!" exclaimed Varvara, shocked out of her resolve.
"But he has left Seoul. . . . Howdo you know? . . . Who
heard?"
"Soloviev heard from the boy's mother. He had reached
Chi-tao-kou, just over the Chinese border. . . . Evidently
he found life unbearable, after all, though he made a show
of indifference." Pavel's tears—
for he was an emotional
drinker—spilled suddenly over his cheek-bones.
"It is not our fault. It is not our fault," said Varvara,
huskily. "What nonsense to cry as if it were our fault! A
boy's folly still remains folly, even if he is dead and will
never be a fool again—
poor little fool!"
tS^ 113 M
Ostapenko pulled his jaw into a few more gapes. His
eyes—brown irises entirely surrounded by whites—glared
in a frightened way at his wife.
"Up to now I have tried to think of Tanya as a dear girl
—
a too charming, too lovely girl.. . . Every lovely girl, I
have thought, has these adventures . . . fascinating danger
to the young bloods . . . fatal gift of beauty. . . the kind
of thing great-aunts in the 'fifties suffered from—love-
tokens, duels, rivals sending rosebuds—
you know what I
mean—quite natural. . . . Now, suddenly, Varitchka, I
don't believe it is natural, or pretty. There's something
wrong. Something unnatural. Something unhealthy." He
said the last word almost in a choking voice. Health was one
of his vanities.
"Unnatural? Unhealthy?" exclaimed Varvara, stitching in
tense jerks. "What is unnatural? What is natural? Only the
majority."
"Well, youth is natural . . . and girlishness. . . and
warmth and motherhood . .
." Pavel was shading his eyes
with his hand, and from beneath his little finger tears that
seemed unwarranted by the matter of what he said ran
down his face. "There's something about our Tanya that
kills decent young creatures like Sasha Weber—
even if
they don't cut their throats or join the Chinese army. Look
at Piotr Isaev; look at Boris Andreievitch, or Stepan. One
can't wag a finger at all this and say, 'A-ha! the saucy chit!'
O God! that's the trouble—she's not near enough to be
saucy. You can't smile at a thing a hundred miles off."
Ideas that looked like the long-ignored truth seemed to
come with appalling clarity into Pavel's humming, giddy
mind. He seemed to see his daughter all at once as a stillness,
an interruption in loud and moving life—something pale
suspended like a ghost, just higher than the ground—about
which gay coarse heavy-footed life moved in vain, moved
and dodged, seeking for glances from eyes that stopped
l!fl3 114 i!iia
warm hearts beating. A little figure of death surviving
Hfe. And this was his daughter. Her existence seemed to
him, in his present mood, an insult to the hfe that dizzied
him in himself. "What kind of a creature have I begotten?"
he croaked. "Something that is a woman and is not."
"There you are/' said Varvara, fiercely flattening the silk
upon her knee. "There you are! Why should everything be
a woman or a man?"
"What do you mean—men—women? What else is
there? Out of men and women comes hfe—the only life
there is."
"Tanya is living."
"Tanya—ah, tschah!—she is living." He was silent,
listening to the sound of Tanya's whisthng. "Yes," he said,
after a moment, in a different voice, "she is hving." He
paused for some time, waving his head a httle as though his
eyes were trying to follow the twirl of a rather giddy world.
"But because of her, Sasha Weber is dead."
"Not because of her, exactly," said Varvara, slowly. "Be-
cause of a collision between new things and old things. . .
Sasha Weber comes at the end of something old—Tanya
comes at the beginning, perhaps, of something new."
"A bad beginning," said Pavel, "since it seems our line
is to stop with her. I don't know what you mean, Varitchka.
Andwhatever you mean, I'm sure it is unhealthy and ugly."
"Everything's unnatural when it begins. Everything's ugly
when we haven't seen it before."
"I don't know what you mean. It is Tanya's duty—
it is
every woman's duty—
to be natural and warm and young,
not to suck life out of warm natural young things and re-
main cold as a cat herself."
"We don't know what is the duty of new things," in-
sisted Varvara. "Perhaps they haven't any. Anyway, new or
old, they're all natural."
"Whatis she, then, you silly woman, if she's not the thing
on 115 la
we know—
a young woman, born to bear children?"
'Terhaps she's a thing/' said Varvara. 'That maple tree's
a thing. A man can love that without wanting to get into
bed with it. Listen."
Tatiana's whistle fluted, stopped again, shaped itself into
an unthinking trill or two.
"Listen/' said Varvara, '\vhose voice is that? That's a
things voice."
And as she applied this cruel word to her daughter, the
word became somehow a word of praise—
a proud word. It
seemed suddenly common to be anything but a thing.
"Ah, tschah!" snorted Pavel, striking the trunk of the
little maple tree with an outflung hand. "It is absurd. I have
been talking nonsense. So have you. Tanya's just an un-
awakened child. The little minx. She has no understanding
of her effect on men. Perhaps the shock of hearing of Sasha's
death and knowing it to be the result of her childish heart-
lessness will—Tanitchka!" he shouted.
Tatiana in the ironing-shed heard his voice with an
urgency that almost stopped her heart. She was' so lost, so
inclosed in her cooing forgetful space, that his voice seemed
like a shot suddenly unwarrantably fired in time of peace.
Her finger was jerked by surprise from the handle of the
iron she was using and pressed for a second on the scorching
metal. The pain of the finger sprang up her arm. After the
first second, her burnt finger was interesting to her—
a
possession to be studied, to be proud of. She began prodding
it, squeezing it, to make it hurt more. The skin thickened
and whitened on the burn; she looked at it closely, feeling
the finger growhotter and hotter—
more and more apoplec-
tic, as though it were so full of blood that it would burst.
"Tanya!" roared her father again from the garden.
Tatiana left the iron burning a sheet and went out of the
shed, through the house, and into the garden.
Her father stood with his arm crooked round a bough
tS^ 116 £123
of the little maple, like one with his arm round the shoulders
of a friend. He looked at Tatiana anxiously, breathing
heavily. Her mother, sitting rigidly, jerking at stitches, did
not look up.
'1 heard a piece of news today," said Pavel, "that may
interest you. Or it may not."
'1 expect it will, papasha," said Tatiana in a drowsy voice.
She stood rocking a little on her feet, torturing her throb-
bing finger.
'*! expect you hardly think it worth while to remember
Alexander Petrovitch Weber," said Pavel, who had become
very angry again directly he saw his daughter. He fixed on
her his characteristic glare that islanded his irises in startled
white. "Sometimes it seems to methat you don't distinguish
between one young man and another. I suppose you think
they're all alike in their folly—and none worthy of your
highncss's attention. My God!" he shouted suddenly, "it
would do you good to be raped by one of them."
Tatiana pinched and tore at her agonising finger.
"Alexander Petrovitch is dead," he said. "He cut his
throat. Just before he killed himself he wrote to his mother
that his death would relieve you of a nuisance."
"That was ridiculous of him," said Tatiana's mother in a
matter-of-fact voice. "It was also very spiteful and theatrical."
"At any rate, you wouldn't waste a tear on Sasha Weber,
of course," said Pavel to his daughter, choking with anger.
"Sasha knew that, of course. But he was mistaken, poor
fool, in thinking that you would feel anything so active as
relief, wasn't he? Whyshould you feel anything at all? What
does it matter to you that a living young man is dead?"
Tatiana looked at her finger. Through the nail, she
noticed, the red blood showed purple. Things were hurt,
things died, blood ran into burnt fingers and out of cut
throats. Containers of uneasy blood, that's all we are. Big
and little, male and female, two-legged, four-legged, six-
ffl3 117 fli3
legged, many-legged, winged and creeping, wise and foolish,
we slide and stride and wiggle about the world until some-
thing called death lets the blood out, to be soaked into the
ground, to be dried into the air, to form again in other con-
tainers. . . . Why should there be any of this merging be-
tween one skinful of blood and bones and another? Why
can't we get used to the loneliness of having separate blood?
Pitchers may go to the same well, be dipped, and come
home full, clinking handles, tinkling together, but always
separate, each with its dreadful integrity complete, its in-
violate solitary storm of contents. Not till the pitcher is
spilled is there a merging—
a cold, loveless merging into
thirsty space. These images, quite clear but wordless, passed
across the screen of Tatiana's sight as she looked at her
finger, cramping the muscles round her eyes till her fore-
head smarted. "Why do I feel my finger and my forehead
hurting, and not the wound in Sasha's throat?" she thought
all at once. "What is it that feels one wound so much and
another not at all?"
The maple tree rustled as Pavel shook it with his tense
arm. His arm was aching to beat his daughter, to break up
her exasperating stillness. "I suppose you don't know why
this unhappy young man killed himself," he croaked.
"No," said Tatiana. She knew that he had killed himself
by way of revenge on her—he had told her that he would,
but she did not know why. What were two me's to each
other, that one should be so necessary to another? Asort of
accident, it seemed, happened in young men's blood that
made them think that two me's could be kneaded together
into an us. Most of them probably lived to find it a mistake.
Only dear Sasha had incredibly thrown his me away—
poured it out of a cut throat, because he could not double it
into an us. Here in this generous world were a million mil-
lion me's—
a million million columns of lonely blood and
bone. There was no such thing as a real us.
fiJU 118 fiiA
"Except the Siamese twins/' said Tatiana aloud, absent-
mindedly.
Pavel boxed her ears.
Varvara got up from her chair, her face twisting, her mind
profoundly disturbed. "Oh, what a complicated family Tve
got!" she thought, proudly. 'Tou must stop and think,
Pavlik," she said, in a dry, urgent voice. "Think. Think. It's
impossible to make things one way that really are another.
Tanya is Tanya, whether you like it or not, and you know,
when you're sober, you like it. She has as much right to be
herself as you have—and even if she hadn't, you couldn't
change her, either by hitting her or in any other way. She
couldn't change herself. She's alive."
"Yes, and Sasha's dead," shouted Pavel. "He had just as
much right to be alive as she has. More right, because he
was natural. He was a man. He should have begotten sons.
What is this thing we have called our daughter? A thing—
a lifeless thing—killing live men. . . . What about our
grandchildren who have a right to be born? A thing that's
not alive is preventing men and women from being alive.
She's cutting us off from our grandchildren. Five times—
six times—
seven times—she might have been married; she
might have been turned into a live woman—
a live mother
—
a live wife. Her face, her body—her woman's face and
body—they're lies. . . . Yes, she's crying now—she looks
almost like a woman when she cries, doesn't she—but it's
."
all lies. . .
Tatiana, her head still bent over her hand as though she
were obsessed by the phenomenon of her burnt finger, was
crying violently—her shoulders jerking, her mouth squared,
the muscles round her eyes quivering, tears springing down
her cheeks and chin. She was rigid with anger against her
father because he was invading her—his words were fet-
tering her, just as his hard hands had clapped an ache round
her head.
m 119 m
"And Piotr Gavrilovitch—whom she promised only a
month or two ago to marry—where is he now? Gone—
turned out, I suppose, since all her promises are lies. I sup-
pose she said, You foolish Petya, that promise of mine was a
joke—
a things promise.. . . Eh? Eh—
? Answer me,
girl."
"What do you want her to answer, Pavlik?" said Varvara,
standing within an arm's-length of her weeping daughter,
but not touching her.
"Answer me, girl. Piotr Gavrilovitch, the last young fool
you lied to—
you showed him the door, I suppose, when
you'd sucked him dry. He's not coming back any more,
is he?"
Tatiana shook her head.
"No, of course not. I suppose you said to him, You can
go and cut your throat now, Petya, as Sasha did. The joke is
over, you said—
till another softhearted young fool comes
along. It's a joke you've played too often, you little snake.
I tell you it's a stale joke. I wonder you can sleep at night.
Whatabout Boris, who went to Shanghai? His father never
heard from him again. Did he cut his throat, too, do you
think, or just starve to death? It doesn't matter to you, of
course, does it? What about old Soloviev's son, Stepan?
You didn't manage to turn him out of his home, but I hope
you're proud of what you did do, for I've never seen him
sober since he left this garden for the last time. WTiat about
Vanya, whose eye you nearly blinded for life at that kissing
game when he was having a bit of fun? What about
Good God, girl!"
For Tatiana was suddenly laughing. She lifted her eyes at
last from her clasped hands and laughed. Apicture of a sort
of centrifugal burst of young men bouncing from one center
had come into her mind. Like a flock of rabbits running
from a weasel—jumping off chffs, plunging into streams,
turning head over heels in panic, springing under railway
1513 120 £ilj
trains—
a bomb of furry fugitives bursting as the result of
one puny little spark of life inside a separate bag of fur. Cer-
tainly seven was too many to cry over. Over one—each one
of the seven—
tears might be shed. Tatiana knew that as
soon as she was quiet again she wouldbe imagining the cruel
look of the knife in poor Sasha's sight—the feel of its press-
ing edge on his tender throat. But now—
seven voices sing-
ing in silly unison, "Good-by forever"—
seven twangs of
breaking hearts like the snapping strings of balalaikas. . . .
The father and mother stood and looked at their giggling
child.
"She is right/' said Varvara after a moment, with a brisk,
hard look, as she folded her sewing. "Seven is too many to
cry over. Seven is like the chorus in comic opera. You go and
lie down, Pavlik; you are over-excited and you talk nonsense.
Tlierc is no reason why Tanya should try to be any different
from what she is. If seventy lovers instead of seven came
along, it wouldn't be her fault if none of them was the right
one. Perhaps she's just more particular than the rest of
us." . . . She looked at her husband with a wry, unnatural
archness. "Or perhaps she's not the kind of girl that mar-
ries. It's only a habit that makes men and old virgins think
so much of love and marriage.. .
."
Varvara stopped speaking, overcome with a sort of de-
spair. All this pain, this weeping, this shouting, was like a
blot upon perfection—
a blot that must be at the same time
erased and accepted by her. This storm must be outwardly
stilled, yet inwardly justified; it must be part of the air of
the house now—and yet it was leaving ruin in its path.
Ruin must henceforth decorate the garden. Part of her pride
in the family's perfection must be Tatiana's imperfection,
just as Pavel's drunkenness had become a subtlety—
an
Ostapenko essential—misunderstood though it might be
outside. She knew that her husband was often drunk, but
ignorant outsiders might think—
well, they might think
flU 121 3J3
that he drank! She knewthere was a fundamental perversity,
a passional lack, in her daughter—but, with so many dis-
appointed and spiteful lovers about, Heaven knew what the
neighbors might say. They might call the child frigid, un-
desirable, likely to live and die alone. One must fashion
these potential weapons into stones to strengthen the ram-
parts of family defense.
"What have you done to your finger, Tanya?" she said,
awkwardly.
"I burnt it on the iron."
Pavel was walking a few steps here and a few steps there
in the hot shade of the garden, clasping and unclasping his
hands, mopping his dripping forehead. "Butter," he said.
"Butter is good for a burn." Thinking of his Tanya—his
claimantfor Ostapenko immortality—burning her finger on
an iron gave him a sharp pain in the pit of his stomach,
though he still longed to beat her and make her scream.
"It is very sore, I suppose," said Varvara. "If you come in
I will put something on it."
"Butter—butter" murmured Pavel, rather wildly.
He was wondering why this business of Tatiana's disap-
pointed lovers had seemed to him so important just now.
By what logical steps had he reached his present condition
of agitation and anger against his daughter? Ever}^thing
seemed unnaturally separated in his mind now: the talk in
the drinking-house with old Soloviev, the news of Sasha's
death at Chi-tao-kou, the sudden discovery that the leaves
of the maple in the garden had turned gold, Varvara's com-
ment on Tatiana's whistling, Tatiana's tears, Tatiana's
laughter, Tatiana's burnt finger, Tatiana's need of a good
whipping, Tatiana's need of butter, his own need of a wash
and a good sleep. . . each of these facts seemed static and
ready-made in his mind, none growing out of any other.
Alone with Tatiana, Varvara said as she bent over the
wounded finger: "Your papa is over-excited. . . the hot
JiU 122 313
weather. . . . His disappointment is natural. Sasha Weber
was the son-in-law he would have liked/'
Tatiana's throat tautened as she imagined a knife at a
throat. Yet really Sasha's suicide hurt her just about as much
as her burnt finger hurt her, no more. Her thoughts were
intermittently free of either injury; they played with the
shape of the sunlight on the floor, with the angular lines of
her father's coat hanging on a chair, with the blowing, casual
design of gusty gold sand blowing across the paper screens.
Chairs, tables, cupboards—heavy props for heavy Russian
bodies, supports for heavy Russian possessions—looked
oddly in the light flat Japanese gold-and-white room. They
were like vulgar plums in a cake or cube of light sweet air.
The alcove that in a Japanese house should hold a flowery
suggestion of an altar framed Katya's sewing-machine. Ta-
tiana could almost see the surprise of that room, finding it-
self patched with such heavy shapes and shadows; finding
itself looking out at a frank spotted world through the crude-
ness of glass windows, instead of veiled by the subtle blind-
ness of paper windows set into fretted frames. Though Ta-
tiana was so well used to the room, she saw it freshly today
because she remembered that Sasha once knocked his head
against the frame of this door. He must have felt the bruise
as now she felt her own burnt finger; her own head, she re-
membered, had ached for an hour in sympathy with his,
just as now her throat tingled and throbbed to the slash of
a knife against his throat. The strange prisoner feeling still
puzzled her—that prisoner, filling his prison with such a
flame of superfluous life, pain, and joy, that the neighboring
human prisons are almost set alight. And then—suddenly
—dead—cold—
no feeling—
no message from the prisoner
ever again. Six months ago the results of the contact of
Sasha's skull against a door-frame were a curse, a blue skin,
an hour's soreness, a little headache, a lot of grumbling,
sympathy from Tatiana, a chronic caution when entering by
iJiffl 123 HtB
that door afterward. Now, Sasha's bones could beat against
hard stones... no protests of skin and blood, no com-
plaint from his quiet lips, no anger in his brain, no sym-
pathy needed from friends and lovers. No sympathy—
no
sympathy needed; no wandering love whistled in by a master
from far fields. She was safe now, she thought, from one
more invasion. Sasha could never make her feel guilty again
—guilty for being Tatiana Ostapenko.
Her finger was throbbing, her head was aching from her
father's blow. She still felt coldly angry with her father—
and yet proud of him. He had attacked her spiritually and
physically, andyet, she thoughthe was so splendid, so queer,
so much more colored and individual than other men. He
was a part of her; for the moment she hated him as she
might hate one's own rebellious limb. "A lonely and wild
father," she thought, "hitting his daughter because she
would take no lover. Howrare! how Ostapenko!" She would
not have contradicted an outsider's view of her father. "'A
simple tipsy man," you might have said, and so he was. Yes,
simple with a precious Ostapenko simplicity; tipsy as a poet
without words. . . . Even ordinary derogatory words could
be twisted by each Ostapenko to feed the family sense of
apartness.
"Well," said Tatiana, "Sasha's safe and dead now." Her
finger hurt so much, as her mother touched it, that she could
almost have wished to die of this injury as Sasha had died of
his. Tatiana's body was always morbidly sensitive to pain.
Little pains, that in other people seemed easily dismissed
from attention, often demanded real fortitude of her. That
was why she was so much preoccupied with the thought of
pain—why she invented stories about pain and death in the
night to make her body thrill.
"My darling," said Varvara, in inquiry, not in criticism,
"have you no feelings for other people's sufferings? Do you
not mind very much about poor Sasha?"
m 124 m
Tatiana listened, a little confused. The two questions
seemed to her to be quite separate. Minding about a person
—
no. Minding about people—well, nobody could feel
more actually than she felt the very feelings of people, ani-
mals, insects, things, ghosts, even the air bruised by shadows.
"No mamma, I haven't any heart," she mumbled, feeling
this to be the safest claim.
Varvara registered this as a confirmation of a new piece
of Ostapenko peculiarity. Her daughter had no heart. Well,
were hearts necessary? Menand women—especially women
—had been judged too much by their capacity for love.
This was because people who love, propagate, thought Var-
vara, and transmit their vulgar standard of love from gen-
eration to generation. Just as rabbits transmit their bobtails.
Bobtails are a conventional rabbit standard. A rabbit with a
long curly tail would be feared, shunned, trampled to death,
so the innovation would die untried, unbequeathed, abor-
tive. But its death didn't prove the essential wrongness of
long curly tails for rabbits. Genius was probably often heart-
less. But genius did not often propagate. Strangeness meant
physical mortality, so strangeness was rare, never reborn, al-
ways new in every manifestation. All the stupid things—
cruelty, prostitution, womanly modesty, conventional reli-
gion, conventional morality—only survived so rampantly
because of the excessive fertility of the stupid.
"Well," she said, lamely, "people with no hearts have no
babies."
"People with no hearts," said Tatiana, "can be the
mothers of—oh—
all sorts of things." She had a vague
feeling of tremendous posterity—mountains, clouds, tigers,
spiders, flowers, cities—
all giving birth. . . . But even as
she spoke she knew that this feeling was an easy and false
consolation.
Varvara sighed and went out. Tatiana went to her room,
her finger greased and bandaged and the more painful for
£fl 125 m
having been treated so seriously. She stood rigidly, looking
toward the window. To look out of her window was, with
her, almost always a prayer or an act of praise to some un-
known God. The window was like the face of God or of a
lover to her; she studied every line and shade, as an adoring
lover studies a face, or a behever a miraculous manifestation.
She marveled so over li\ing things, simply because they
lived, moved, breathed, grew, begot, conceived. Yet she was
accused of killing, of treachery to that strange quiet empire,
the law of which is the beating of the heart. She, who valued
things for their independence of herself, for their incompre-
hensibility, for their magical remoteness—she who so
slightly intruded even upon her own life—
was reproached
for intruding on the lives of others. All the world outside
her window was jeweled with impeccable life—and she,
trusted in the treasure-house, was a convicted robber. She
set her eyes and her face toward that world, but a voice in
her heart \\as crying: 'Take me out of the earth, that I may
hear no more the reproach.... If men who lived are dead,
why should I, who ne\er lived, have the right to breathe
when every breath I take is a lie? Or if I must live, let me
live at last, let mebe a womanalive, as these animals around
me are animals alive. . . . Let me no longer see only—
let
me be. . . . It ought to be easy to li\e," she thought, des-
perately, breaking off her prayer and dragging her eyes from
the bright window. "Even a worm in the earth can
live. . .
." Her finger throbbed and burned. She looked at
it, pinched it. "Oh, you liar!" she said.
She went down from her room, through the sunn^-
kitchen and out through the ironing-shed into the yard. She
noticed the iron standing on the sheet as she had left it, and,
lifting it up, looked at the angular heart-shaped burn on the
linen. The sheet was not spoiled in Tatiana's eyes; the mark
was symmetrical, shapely, and of a fine sienna color. The
thing, in fact, was simply branded with a signature of oddity.
fiJJ 126 flJl
She left the iron tilted upright, and thought that it looked
like a creature begging forgiveness for the sin of printing a
private and unlicensed mark upon its world.
She leaned on the gate of her father's yard, looking out at
the valley, at the crisscrossing paths, the yellow mud-walled
houses, the tree where she had parted from Piotr Isaev, the
last of her lovers. She leaned one cheek on the top bar of
the high gate, and looked at the world sideways, under the
blurred arch formed by the bone of her nose and brow. Seen
sideways, thus framed, everything in sight looked separate
and significant—
to be seen by itself. The barley looked as
if it were being brushed upward by an impossible perpen-
dicular wind. The soft hills changed their angles and were
now built of precipices down which the clouds rolled like
avalanches. And, as if the freshness of this sideways view
quickened also her hearing, she could hear with a sudden
urgency the starlings in the big tree preparing for autumn
flight. Tliey were making that curious wailing whistle—
al-
most like a miniature howling—that starlings utter in their
migratory restless mood. Andas soon as Tatiana noticed this
sound, she could see that almost every leaf in the tree had a
bird behind it. The tree was as full of movement as a bon-
fire; whistling curled up from it like smoke.
Tatiana felt an arch tweak at her instep. She looked down
and saw that all the chickens in the yard, thinking that her
presence meant a meal, were gathered about her feet. Each
hen looked incredulously at the unexpectedly uneatable dust
about her feet, first with one eye and then with the other.
Tatiana, watching them, putting thoughts into their narrow
heads, presently became aware that, leaning on the gate, she
had opened it a little, and the disappointed hens were wan-
dering out into the road.
Tatiana, dancing on her toes as she always did, ran out
after them, and as she did so, a further block of hens
squeezed out with a rustle and a cackle. "Chok-chok-chok/'
flJl 127 M
she called, throwing imaginary grain in the gateway. A few
hens went in and a few more came out. "Supposing they
were men/' thought Tatiana. "Men that I was trying to
lead—like Joan of Arc—
to some great enterprise. I should
have to fail, with such silly rebels as these behind me." Her
supposings always promoted her to a first place. "Friend, go
up higher" was always the note of her imaginative orgies, al-
though in actual life she never asserted herself. But in her
imagination she never knew herself as a mere Tanya.
In her mind, now, the indecision of the hens was as articu-
late as her own predicament. "What does she want us to
do?" she thought for the hens. "This way—that way—
which way? Vm trying to do right, but—what is right? Oh,
what a puzzling world this is, outside our gate.. .
!"
With a good deal of flurry and worry Tatiana drove the
chickens—
all of them but three—back into the yard.
There they were, that group of cackling conservatives, try-
ing to collect their wits after their daring excursion into
novelty, scratching feverishly at the dust and, in their ex-
citement, hardly looking at what their scratching had turned
up. Tatiana thought they all must have that bathed, naked
feeling that comes on getting safely home after a new ex-
perience. But she had no time to enjoy their relief, for the
three exceptions were hurrying away into the world. They
believed that they were being chased by a perfectly uncon-
scious and absentminded donkey which was carrying a load
along the track, side by side with its small boy tyrant. The
three hens hurried from side to side of the track, confusedly
flattering themselves that so far they had cleverly outwitted
their pursuer.
Tatiana looked at the misunderstood donkey lovingly and
wondered if all devils were devilish by mistake. She pulled
the mild devil's dusty ear as she ran by.
The hens redoubled their efforts. Two devils were evi-
dently after them now, they thought. They had entirely for-
££13 128 filjj
gotten which way the peaceful cabbage-stalks and fish-heads
of home lay. Their lives had suddenly become one huge
delirium. Tatiana giggled as she ran. Who would have
thought that three hens could run so fast and so far. She
imagined her mother saying to her father, "Where can our
Tanya have got to, Pavlik? Can she have gone to weep on
Sasha's grave at Chi-tao-kou?" And then the efficient Japa-
nese police telephoning, "Anone . . . anone . . . mushi
—mushi—
anone. Your daughter was last seen climbing
the rocks of the Umi-Kongo in pursuit of three hens. . .
."
Every time Tatiana burst into a wily gallop, hoping to
outrun the hens in one spurt, the hens did the same and
outran her. It was a hopeless situation; Tatiana wasted a lot
of breath in giggling.
Passers-by were quite unhelpful. None of the Koreans on
the road lifted a finger to shock the errant fowls into a re-
turn. The only Korean that helped at all did it unwittingly.
He was lying quite drunk on his side near the ditch, his top-
hat tilted over one temple; he was singing in a smiling little
whine to himself, and when the hens found themselves look-
ing into a human face on a level with their own beaks, they
very nearly decided to turn back. But on second thoughts
they made a wide detour and hurried on.
But about a hundred yards farther on, the hens met two
pairs of boots which danced menacingly about the road,
while voices thundered, "Chok-chok-chok." The hens
turned back. The odds were too heavy—devils before and
devils behind. How can hens die better than facing fearful
odds? Almost any way—much better—thought the hens.
Tatiana, close on their tails—for the hens were getting tired
—
saw for a moment only the boots of the approaching
strangers shuffling helpfully in front of the hens. Then she
managed to seize one hen by the wing and snatch it to her
bosom in a storm of flying feathers and dying yawps. The
m 129 m
other hens rushed round in circles. They were caught by the
strangers.
Tatiana hadan impression of clumsy size in the mannear-
est to her, but she hardly saw his face because at that mo-
ment all the sky became full of birds, keeping a vast rendez-
vous in the sky. Thousands and thousands of birds decided
at that moment to fly back to their lost summer; thousands
and thousands of them merged into a great giddiness against
the blue—
a wind for the sight. Their thousands of twit-
terings and whisperings ran together into one wide shrill
sibilance; the rustlings of their countless wings were
smoothedinto an inimitable breathing. It was impossible for
even Tatiana to think thoughts into such a multitude; it
seemed they must fly in a kind of democratic ecstasy or
trance, they must think with a multiple me, an ego spread
thinly over the whole sky like butter on bread.
Tatiana, dazzled and giddy, watching the birds, heard
one of the strangers talking what seemed to her to be Eng-
lish, and in the midst of the unknown words she caught her
own family name. She looked then at the two men with the
shocked, half-insulted puckered look with which she in-
stinctively met any approach—a look of, "Sir, pray unhand
me." She saw Wilfred Chew's gold tooth. Where had she
seen that strange thing before? Of Seryozha she only sav/
that his eyelids were very much tucked in under the brow
bones, and that his hair was bleached and rough.
Seryozha saw very much more of Tatiana than she saw of
him. A feeling of quick interest seemed now to establish
itself in his mind with the familiarity of an old feeling,
though he had not realized that he had paid much attention
to the talk of either Alexander Weber or Wilfred Chew.
She was a little too odd-looking for his rather childish taste;
her face was too white, her hair too dark a red, her eyes too
light and wide. Yet he felt instantly in touch with a new
m 130 m
and manly experience; the expression of her face, puckered,
he thought, against the sun—though really it was against
himself—seemed to be laughing and young, but laughing
through a mist. There was something in her eyes that re-
minded him of his father's blindness—
or, he thought, of
that queer glare in the moon's face that gave him, on a clear
night, that sense of inexplicable hunger. She was bowed a
little on one side to hold the horrified chicken under her
arm; she looked like a child trying to hide a forbidden toy,
bending askew, alert to run. There was a just visible twitch-
ing of the muscles under the soft bluish skin below her
eyes. This still creature could move, then; there was a flutter
in this stone.
"This, Saggay Saggayitch," said Wilfred Chew (who had,
you see, madean advance in intimacy), "this is Miss Tatiana
Ostapenko whomI mentioned to you once or twice before.
She, unfortunately, in common with the rest of her family,
speaks no English, but I believe she will remember that we
had the mutual pleasure of meeting, some time ago, when
I called on her father with Sir Tlieo Mustard. Kindly recall
this to her mind in Russian."
Seryozha at once withdrew his eyes from Tatiana, since
he was about to address her. He looked at a stone on the
ground, at the vanishing cloud of birds. "This Chinese fel-
low says you know him," he mumbled.
'1 remember," said Tatiana, remembering suddenly. "He
came in a motor-car with an imbecile English lord."
"She remembers, does she not?" said Wilfred, compla-
cently. "I thought she would. I was right."
It was impossible for Tatiana to carry three hens under
two arms. She carried one, Seryozha carried the other two.
Tatiana walked a step in front—she was never quite with
any one. Seryozha did not look at her. He slouched along,
looking at his shoes—the toe of one of which was com-
pletely worn away—looking down at the hens. The hens
tS^ 131 tSi
were looking at each other across his lower chest with an
unexpectedly calm expression. Seryozha, who suddenly felt
much cleverer than usual, remembered another English
idiom. "Look/' he said to Wilfred, "Mrs. Hen say, 'Keep
stiff upper beak, sister.'
He swung along, pleased with his wit, looking at every-
thing except Tatiana. Nobody said anything else.
But just as they passed the village tree, emptied now of
its birds, Tatiana looked up and, with one little dancing
step, broke the rhythm of their silent walk. And Seryozha
looked at her then, looked at her straight young back, her
headkerchief, which had slipped back to her nape, looked
at the clothes and trifles that incased her—the comb that
held her red hair, the faded blouse, the full, uneven cotton
skirt, her brown bare legs, her feet shod with cloth shoes.
He saw these things clinging to her slim dancing body—
this rustling cloud of faded cotton swinging round her body.
She didn't know that little tape was showing at her neck
he thought gently. She was suddenly real to him, because he
could imagine the homely habit by which she wDuld put on
those touching clothes—
a comb here, a button there, and
then a look in the mirror to see, anxiously, if everything was
pleasant and decent. That little tape, the day-worn look of
the hem of her skirt, the dust on her blunt Chinese shoes,
humbled her charmingly in his sight. He strutted behind
her; the hens seesawed under his arms, sharing involuntarily
in his swagger.
•T«Y«V /#•?•
fY«Y*Y*1 I 91
•T«T*T*T*Y*Y*V* i^mmmmNM
•V*Y*Y*Y«Y*Y V*TfY*V«V*Y«
WA/
CHAPTER EIGHT
Pavel Ostapenko lifted his dripping face from the washing-
basin and looked out of the window, blinking his staring
eyes. Two unknown young men with Tatiana—
no, on sec-
ond thoughts, one, for the second was a Chinese. 'Tunny,"
thought Pavel. '1 seem to have seen them both before."
'"Varitchka," he called hoarsely to his wife in the next room,
*\vhere have we seen these young men before?"
"What, more young men . . .
?" moaned Varvara. She
looked between the flowers in the window at Seryozha and
Wilfred. Seryozha was squatting down, launching the hens
into freedom, as though they were little ships. Like little
ships in full sail they sprang away from him with wings out
and bowsprit necks craning. Tatiana, watching them, had a
simple hen's relief written upon her face. Her fingers flut-
tered like rudimentary wings.
"The Chinese," said Varvara, "is the man who came in
once, with an Englishman and a French valet, when their
car broke down. We gave them tea, you remember. We
could only talk to them through the valet. I remember the
Chinese because of his one gold tooth. That Russian lad is
a stranger to me. So he is to you, Pavlik. You are muddled
M 133 M
today. How could you ever have seen him before with-
out me?"
"Yes, I have. His face is absolutely famihar. It is some-
thing about that hne from jaw to ear; something, too, about
his eyes—the hds so deeply tucked in. Who can it be?"
Heturned Ser}'Ozha's face about in his memoryas one turns
an unopened letter, testing one's instinct, yet refusing to
prove it by a simple practical act.
'1 have it," said Pavel. 'That boy is exactly like mysister's
husband's cousin, Sergei Dmitrivitch Malinin. Hehad those
eyes and that carriage of the head, exactly. I knewhim when
I was a child and he was this lad's age. I may have met him
once or twice later, too. He was in my brother-in-law's busi-
ness in Moscow. This boy's height and build and coloring
are all quite unlike—
yet the eyes and the jaw.... I never
saw such a likeness. Sergei Dmitrivitch was a silly lad, I see
now, but I thought a lot of him then, because he could
move his scalp and his ears by themselves—his hair slipped
all of a piece right back, like this. Ah, tschah! I can't do
it. . . . Howwell I remember. ... I used to say, 'Wobble
your hair, Seryozha,' and he always did it for me. I think he
was flattered by myadmiration of his skill."
"Your cousin Sergei Dmitrivitch," said Varvara, assent
dawningin her face. "The man who said that the seat of the
soul was in the nape of the neck? He came to supper with
us, in Moscow, soon after we were married. It must be
twenty-five years ago. I have never forgotten the way he
fingered the back of his neck as he talked, as if he were en-
couraging his soul. Yes," she said, leaning tensely between
the fuchsias in the window, "I can see what you mean about
the eyes of this boy. But it must be imagination, Pavlik."
Tatiana came in. She felt almost as if she had created
Seryozha; it was quite important to her that her parents
should approve of this new Russian that she and her hens
had conjured out of empty air on a Korean trail where no
m 134 m
new Russian had been heard of before. Russians in Far
Eastern villages are so well used to living in water-tight com-
munities that they forget there are such things as strangers
of their own race.
"A Russian young fellow is here/* said Tatiana. "And a
Chinese who says he is the one that came with that imbecile
Englishman whom you taught to say Za Vashe zdorovye
papasha/'
Pavel was now feeling that exalted feeling that comes just
after a drink and just before the reaction. He went to the
door sparkling with handsomeness and enthusiasm. Ser-
yozha, in the yard, still showing off a little in case some one
might be looking out of the window, was making his dog
jump over an upraised stick.
"Come in! Come in! Come in!" shouted Pavel Osta-
penko. "It is seldom we meet strangers of our race
—seldom
"
indeed that we have the pleasure of
W'^ilfred Chewpushed in front of Seryozha and shook one
of Pavel's two generous outstretched hands. "You will re-
member me, I feel sure, Mr. Ostapenko," he said in English.
"I had the mutual pleasure of calling here with a gentleman
called Sit Tlico Mustard, of Leeds, England, about a month
ago. And now I introduce another gentleman'*
Pavel laughed breezily. "Tell your friend," he said in
Russian to Seryozha, "that I can't speak or understand
English. I can understand it written down, because I have
to depend for news on the English newspapers, but spoken
it means nothing to me." As usual, his pleased voice made
this ignorance sound like a virtue or a cleverness. The
spontaneous reply to the tone of Pavel's voice explaining
one of his shortcomings would have been, "Well, well—
I
congratulate you.. .
."
"\\^ere do you come from, my dear sir, and may I know
your name?"
flJJ 135 fiffl
"We come from Chi-tao-kou/' mumbled Seryozha, feel-
ing too large for the door as he was drawn in. Wilfred
Chew, coming across the sitting-room between the two big
Russians, looked like a cocoanut palm between two oaks.
Then Pavel said, "Do you know my cousin, Sergei Dmit-
rivitch Malinin?"
"We know him," said Seryozha, with the young boor's
natural instinct to begin by being disobliging in the giving
of information. He added to Wilfred in English, "They
speak, do I know my own papa?"
This was the kind of joke that appealed to Wilfred. That
some one else should not know something that he himself
knew, seemed to him essentially flattering and amusing.
(One notices the same ready sense of simple fun in a rustic,
directing a stranger through his village—"Turn by Wink-
ler's Corner. . . . What,you don't knowWinkler's Corner
where Mrs. Thompson's mare fell down dead last year?
Well, it's opposite the Glebe Field. . . . For goodness'
sakes, you don't know that, either?'* etc., etc.) Wilfred
Chew laughed with delighted hissings, because these simple
Ostapenkos did not know that Seryozha was his father's son.
Pavel was baffled by Seryozha's uncommunicative man-
ner. "Is Sergei Dmitrivitch in good health?" he asked,
though he really wanted to say: "What's the matter? Is my
old cousin dead or has he turned you out of doors, young
man?"
"He is in good health," said Seryozha, and added, indif-
ferently, "He is myfather."
"Well, well!" shouted Pavel, leaping up and clapping his
hands about Seryozha's shoulders. "My dear, dear boy, you
don't know what it means to us in our exile to have a kins-
man walking in like this. Wehaven't heard anything of any
of our kin since the revolution, and though your father and
I are only distant cousins, I used to have the greatest ad-
AH 136 £iJJ
miration for him. Can he still move his ears and the hair
on the top of his head?"
"He has no hair to move, now/' said Seryozha. "And he
isn't merry enough to do that kind of thing now. He is
blind."
"Blind!" Pavel's emotions, always a little exaggerated by
the excitement of a drink just over or that of a drink to
come, at once materialized in the form of a tear in each eye.
"Ah, poor man! poor man! Blind! ... I am very tender-
hearted. Excuse me."
"Explain me what he is saying," said Wilfred, anxiously.
But there was no time, for Pavel went on:
"Bhndness—the most terrible of all afflictions, especially
to a man of your father's sturdy independence of character.
. . . He used to be so kind to me when I was a young boy
and he a youth about town in Moscow. His hair, falling
backward, looked like an accident. Lord! How I used to
laugh! And now he is blind. Ah, how carefree children are
. . . how little they know. . .
."
His beautiful deep voice, uttering these sad words, seemed
to bring to the minds of all three Ostapenkos the unearthly
and tragic glamour of a remembered Ostapenko childhood.
Egoists always have unhappy childhoods, and always look
back on them in an agony of rapture and emotion. The
eyes of both Varvara and Tatiana were wet at the thought
of the laughter of little Ostapenkos, unconscious of a
threatened doom.
"They are all cr\dng," said Wilfred, feverishly. "Explain
me, please, Saggay Saggayitch, what is being said."
"It is curious how all members of our family—mine and
no doubt yours, Sergei Sergeievitch"
Pavel included
Seryozha's family as a polite afterthought, "are haunted by
this sense of doom—
this atmosphere of tragedy—from
birth till death, and always a tragically sudden death, mind
you. A hard-drinking, hard-riding, passionate, gloomy, sen-
£lI3 137 ffl
sitive, tragic breed.. .
/' He rolled these delicious words
in his throat, drew himself up to his full splendid height,
and glared at Seryozha, as though scorching into his young
kinsman's intelligence the baneful splendor of his connec-
tion with the tragic Ostapenkos. "This air of doom—
your
father's blindness is a fearful example of it
—
seems to affect
even those who come in contact with us. My daughter's
betrothed, Alexander Petrovitch Weber By the way,
were you still at Chi-tao-kou when that tragedy culmi-
nated?"
"What tragedy? You mean when Alexander Petrovitch
lost his papers?"
"He lost his life," said Pavel. "He cut his throat."
Seryozha caught his breath and looked at Tatiana. There
seemed to him to be no spontaneous connection between
this live young woman and that dead young man. For he
had an extravagant respect for life; unconsciously, he en-
shrined it as a holiness. The power of movement, the sight
of movement, and the feeling of movement were his trin-
ity.
Tatiana rubbed her hands slowly together and passed the
tip of her tongue across her lips, looking here and there,
but not at Seryozha.
"It is certainly a curse," boomed Pavel, standing swinging
his weight from one foot to the other, almost as though he
were dancing. "It is part of the family curse which you and
we, as kinsmen, share. Tanya has had seven admirers, and
all have felt the force of the family doom. Weare certainly
accursed. ... If you were not a cousin of ours
—and thus
involved in any case
—
I would advise you to keep away
from us, young man. Ostapenkos affect all who approach
them."
"Kindly explain what he is saying, Saggay Saggayitch,"
twittered Wilfred.
"Thatcase of champagne, Varitchka mydear," said Pavel,
M 138 £ili3
"may be said to have been long waiting to be opened in
honor of a kinsman/'
Varvara, frowning with excitement, went out of the room,
and as she passed Seryozha she said in a low voice to him,
"Sergei Sergeievitch—
you mustn't judge her by love/'
Ser}'Ozha turned quickly and looked after her, gaping.
"Well, these are queer birds, these Ostapenkos," he
thought, and had an impulse to step to the door and shout
after his hostess, "I don't intend to/'
"What did Mrs. Ostapenko whisper to you, Saggay Sag-
gayitch?" cried Wilfred, rumpling his thick black hair in a
frenzy of thwarted enthusiasm.
"Alexander Petrovitch," said Pavel, "was my darling fu-
ture son-in-law—the ideal son-in-law. Sometimes I think,
Sergei Sergeievitch, that women exist only to suck the blood
out of men. . . . Excuse me a moment. . .
/' He could
hear that Varvara was looking in the wrong place for the
champagne.
"Please, please, what is he talking about, Saggay Sag-
gayitch?" said Wilfred desperately, as their host went out.
"Oi . . . about mans . . . and womans . . . plenty
things," said Seryozha. He was looking blankly at Tatiana's
reflection in a looking-glass. It was an old dark glass that
made everything seem twilit and leaden—
even Tatiana's
bright hair.
Tatiana, crouched over something on the table, said,
"Have you ever noticed that there are always pictures of
spotted deer on all Japanese match-boxes? Sometimes in one
attitude, sometimes in another, but always under a little
tree. I wonder why."
Seryozha did not know why, so he only grunted humbly.
Wilfred Chew, feeling anxiously that an opportunity for
wit or sentiment was being missed, leaned forward, grinning
with all his teeth, and said, "Howsho, Miss Ostapenko,
hoToshOy hoiosho. . .
." HoTosho was the only Russian
m 139 m
word he knew, and of course it was an enthusiastic and
ambiguous one. Poor Wilfred, it was torture for him to be
left out of talk.
Pavel came back with the hurried gait of one who has
thought of several good things to say while he has been
away.
"Women, Sergei Sergeievitch, are like a kind of dry rot
in a man's world/' shouted Pavel, who was suffering from
one of the momentary spasms of dislike of women that
come to a man who lives alone with devoted women to
whom he is reluctantly devoted.
'1 must say, I don't understand this grumbling at things
for being things," said Seryozha, feeling very manly. "You
can't grumble even at a louse for being a louse; only if it
pretends to be a beetle—then you can grumble. Or if it
bites you, you can grumble at the bite. But bite or no bite,
it is what it is. I don't think women are dry rot, or anything
but just women. They do what they were born to do, just
as we do and lice do."
"You are like all young people in these days, cousin, full
of contradictory arguments," said Pavel, genially, without
giving attention to a word Seryozha had said. "I'll tell you
a story out of my own experience—
a story that always
seems to me to typify the mean part women play in men's
affairs. Excuse me a moment while I open this bottle.
Tanya, the wire-cutter."
Tatiana, without rising and without lowering her eyes,
which were fixed in a kind of blurred stare on the match-
box on the table, pulled out a drawer close to her. She was
for a second obliged to focus her eyes on the contents of the
drawer as she selected the wire-cutter and handed it to her
father. Then she fixed her blurred, trance-like gaze on her
father. Hewas half turned away from her toward the guests,
and she could see the layer of healthy fat at the corner of his
jaw, his cheek, the side muscle of his neck, and even his ear,
ffi 140 aa
wobbling as he talked. She thought, what an inconceivably
over-elaborate use we make of these strips of flesh—
our
lips, our tongues, our hands, our feet . . . praying, singing,
telling lies, explaining philosophies, opening champagne
bottles, making watches and guns, dancing, treading out
grapes.. . . WTiat a complicated destiny for something that
is, after all, nothing but meat. . . . The natural thing for
lips to utter is a grunt, thought Tatiana—
a kind, calm
grunt like Ser^'ozha's. Yet there was the flesh on the sides
of her father's skull all quivering like a jellv to no purpose,
the bones all shaking anxiously with superfluous effort.
Pavel poured out three glasses of champagne for his two
guests and himself. Wilfred shook his head vigorously. '1
never touch alcohol," he said. "Its dangers have been so
well explained to me by Reverend Mr. Os\^'ald Fawcett.
And, Miss Ostapenko, I see, does not touch alcohol, either."
Pa\el hesitated and then poured out half a glass for his
daughter. His attention was drawn by this to Wilfred, and
he said: "Your friend might be interested in my story too.
WTiat a pity that he speaks no civilised language."
Wilfred, feeling that he was being referred to, bowed
excitedly several times.
"About ten years ago," said Pavel, settling down. "Or
wasn't it ten years ago? Anyway, at the time the Japanese
and Americans were at \nadivostok, I happened to be buy-
ing ponies in Mongolia. Where\er there is war, Sergei Ser-
geievitch, somebody will be ready to pay for horses, and
horses are my skill. All Ostapenkos have an eye for a horse.
Some people ha\e skill in writing poetr}^, some in starching
evening dress shirts. I have skill in horses. Those little
Mongolian horses are excellent in their way—the English
race them and play polo with them in Shanghai, I believe
—and in the war I found it several times worth while to
go down into Mongolia, leaving my wife and baby in
\^adivostok, and buy direct from the Mongolian breeders.
m HI ffl
An amusing expedition, that; the Mongol horse-breeders
are decent, hospitable men if you treat them fairly, though
—God!—they smell! They live in tents and feed you on
mutton—mutton—mutton—cooked sour, somehow—
nothing but mutton (except that once I found a horse-tail
in the big family stewpot. Lord! I can tell you I went out
and vomited)/'
"What is all this about, Saggay Saggayitch?"
"He eat sheep and horse's tail," said Seryozha, and poor
Wilfred, astounded, fell back in his chair, trying to hook
this information on to anything that had gone before.
*'At the time I crossed the border into Mongolia, the
out-of-the-way districts were hardly affected at all, as yet, by
the revolution or its after effects. Once one got away from
the railway zone, one was off the track of politics. So when
I returned into Siberia, with fifty good ponies, I was sur-
prised to come across a troop of Red cavalry—the offshoots
of Boudeny's activities, I suppose—under the command of
a scoundrel called Ivanov."
"Bolshevik horses," said Seryozha in English, seeing Wil-
fred drawing breath to bleat another hopeless appeal.
"Now I, Sergei Sergeievitch, am an unsentimental man
without any prejudices. I am always ready to receive new
ideas. My skill in horses is my only fixed idea. Perhaps I
shall shock you by saying that—
at any rate at that time—
though I had steered clear of politics my sympathies were
rather with the revolution than against it. Twenty years be-
fore, my younger brother had been sent to Siberia, as a
student, for speaking at a meeting in Moscow. I never heard
of him again, and naturally that had made an impression
on me that was hostile to the Tsarist regime. I always be-
haved as a good and cautious subject of the Tsar, of course,
still, I was open-minded about a change of government.
So that when I found myself, without warning, in a camp
of Red soldiers, and was detained, with my four Korean
U 142 m
grooms, I was able to face Ivanov without prejudice or
panic. 'General/ I said, Tm a man of no prejudices. Vm
not afraid of you, and I tell you straight out, I can see that
most of your horses are worn out and only fit for a merciful
bullet, and that half your men don't know how to put a
saddle across a horse properly or ride the beast when sad-
dled.' Ivanov was astounded at my sang-hoid. 'Hmphl' he
said."
Pavel's voice was quite enough to make himself the hero
of his story, unaided by the sense of his words. He quoted
himself in a voice of noble clarion courage, and Ivanov in
a barbarous snarl. The hmph of Ivanov whetted Wilfred's
appetite for explanation to an almost unbearable keenness.
"My goodness gracious! Saggay Saggayitch, what does
that mmpp mean?"
"He speak, Bolshevik has bad horses."
"But this story cannot be all about horses," wailed Wil-
fred.
Pavel, however, swept on: "Well, of course, Ivanov could
see at once what kind of man I was, and, in a word, he not
only promised to buy my horses, but, since he was likely to
be in that valley most of the hot weather, employed me,
informally, to lick his detachment into shape, both horse
and man. It was a job. As a rule, our peasants have what
I call 'horse sense,' but those louts—my God!—they must
have been brought up with newts in a swamp or polar bears
on an iceberg. They simply didn't know which end of a
horse was which."
"I thought you said this story was about women," said
Seryozha, who had been rather touched by Wilfred's last
cry. ... He added aside to Wilfred, "He speak still about
horse."
"Wait," said Pavel, with a breathy laugh. "The women
will come—they always do, curse them." He poured out
more champagne. He felt very much alive, as he always
m 143 ffl
felt when he had been more than half drunk and, after a
period of irritation and partial sobriety, had begun to drink
again. He tingled with a glorious heroism; every muscle,
every nerve, ever}^ thought felt bright as a sword, after
a little hour of rusty eclipse. "They were waiting to be rein-
forced by some artiller}^ before tackling a stray independent
party of White military engineers and miners, in a high
mining village in the mountains. The Whites were in a
very strong position. The only way up to the village was up
a very steep ravine, or in a little dangling gravity trolley on a
wire (which had, of course, been cut by Ivanov). The vil-
lage must have been quite fifteen hundred feet above valley
level; you could see it like—like—well, like the gold
crown on a tall tooth, if you can imagine it, clamped, one
might say, on a tiny peaked plateau. A couple of machine-
guns could, and did, easily defend the pass. It was a diffi-
cult job for Ivanov, and he was particularly anxious to put it
through because Colonel Rodin was said to be in command
up there—
a colonel of engineers who had given a good
deal of trouble up and down that region. The place, too,
was a regular magnet to all the miners of White sympathies
in those mountains. The only thing Ivanov could do for
the present was to stop their valley water supply—an
elaborate hydraulic business that fed several of the mines
from the river. I remember it being constructed several
years before by an American mining engineer. Ivanov, of
course, put that out of action, but still they held on, so
they must have had mountain streams up there, or pretty
big emergency cisterns/'
Wilfred bounced in his chair, performing a little im-
promptu dance on his buttocks. "What is all this about,
please?"
"They stop water-pipe," said Seryozha, and Wilfred,
though profoundly puzzled, was at least relieved that the
story had left the subject of horses.
flifl 144 flJJ
"'My dear Ivanov/ I said, 'excuse me, but you simply
don't know the kind of people you're up against. I know
this region; I know these miners; I know dozens of the men
in charge of these mines; you're up against something as
stubborn as the mountains themselves, given just these
kinds of conditions. They're adventurers, these miners, and
that means they're individuahsts, and that again means that
in ordinary circumstances every man is for himself—they're
not the "shoulder-to-shoulder" kind, when nothing threat-
ens them; they'd as soon break a man's nose as shake his
hand. Sometimes they're the sons of political exiles, and
sometimes they've lived in these mountains so long that
they've almost forgotten their mother tongue. They don't
sing pretty songs about Holy Russia, or go, with clean
faces, to church on Sunday. But once something does hap-
pen to bring them together (and you may depend on it,
Stepan Rodin knows how to handle them), well, I tell you
they'll never give in. You know what Rodin is
—people
say he's the son of a priest, you know, and only the adopted
son of old Rodin, and I bet he's made a holy war of this.
. . . What's more, I'll bet they've got a priest in that village,
praying night and day while we sit here, to a little packed
church. They've got their women and children to defend
up there, too, and that always makes a difference. Once
these fellows remember God—
once they feel they've got
God behind them—
well,' I said (and it was a funny thing
to say to a Red anarchist like Ivanov), 'God is behind
them. . .
.' You see, Sergei Sergeievitch, I remembered I
was a religious man myself. Political reform is one thing,
but I was sick of the blasphemy and filthy twaddle in that
camp. I don't see why you can't set up an enlightened gov-
ernment and still worship God. Well, that's what I said,
anyway—and it was disastrous for me."
The good-natured Seryozha realized that this part of the
story would certainly interest the student from the Wes-
m 145 !£3
leyan Academy. "In such high mountains they are praying
to God, he speak," said Seryozha, and was rewarded by
Wilfred's look of bland, if blank, gratification. Wilfred's
glass of champagne was strangely empty. Wrapt away in his
emotional prison, he had been absently sipping his wine all
this time, for lack of anything better to do with his lips.
It was at this point that Wilfred was inspired to get out his
notebook and his fountain pen and begin to write in Eng-
lish in his insipid clerkly hand. The plot of Pavers stOT}% as
it filtered through to Wilfred, was so very exiguous as hardly
to be able to engage even the most optimistic attention,
and Wilfred had thought of another way to reestablish
himself in the center of the stage. Hardly had he put pen
to tooth when, as by a miracle, his glass was full again. He
wrote earnestly on, sipping his wine, sucking his pen, writ-
ing again, and only rarely lifting up his voice to inquire
affably after the progress of the stor}\
Seryozha was getting bored. He looked at Tatiana across
the stream of her father's voice that ran between them. She
seemed to be getting smaller and smaller; she was sinking
lower and lower in her chair. She was really tr\'ing to be
unobtrusive—
to be part of the twilight—because if her
father should notice her, she was likely to be sent to help
her mother and Kat\'a in the kitchen. Tatiana, when still,
was very indolent, afraid to break a spell of peace; when
moving, she moved ardently, she danced, she ran. Now she
hardly breathed. She listened to the story, lending her faint
changes of expression to the changing phases of the story
—frowning for Ivanov, tossing her head for Rodin, assum-
ing a delicate insolence for her father's defiances. She and
Ser}^ozha, all the time, looked at each other across the river
of talk with eyes endowed by wine with a sort of magnifying
intensity of sight.
Pavel was opening a third bottle of champagne, but he
did not stop talking. "W^at I said made Ivanov uncon-
m 146 m
trollably angry. IVe often thought since that he must once
have been a man of simple orthodoxy, before Bolshevik
propaganda filled his stupid mind. That would account for
his anger at what I said; one is always more annoyed by
hearing something one might once have said oneself. He
said a good man\- things about my infecting his sound men
with outworn superstitions—treason to the Soviet—you
know the kind of thing. . . and then he literally kicked
me out of camp—unarmed—without a kopek. He'd got
myhorses, mind you, and not a penny did he pay for them,
the dirty scoundrel. Tou can carry a message to your
friends, sitting trusting in their divine cockalorum on that
mountain top,' he shouted. Tou can tell them that with
the hot weather coming on and their water supply in my
hands, they'd find it wisest to change sides. . . . You go
there and tell them that and stay there,' he said. Terhaps
I'll pay you your money when you bring them all down, all
with your tongues hanging out, ready to lick our hands for
a drink. . .
.' I really think he wanted me to carry that
message—that's why he let me go. Anyway, I went. I
couldn't do anything else. His men had taken all my money
and papers and my grooms had disappeared. I just thrust
my chest out and walked up the pass—
as well as I could
for a kick one of the dirty brutes had given meon the ankle.
The defenders wouldn't waste their machine-gun ammuni-
tion on one lame man. I shouted, 'Don't shoot,' and waved
my arms, and they let me come. They searched me, and
then I had a talk with Rodin. Would you believe it? there
—
were some quite good-looking women in the village
Russian refugee women, I mean, not the miners' wives—
refugees who'd drifted there in Rodin's wake, I suppose.
. . . Ever}thing was upside down in those days. My God!
they were hard up for water. There was a little cascade in
the ravine, but it was almost dried up, and their cisterns
were almost empty. No likelihood of rain, either, and, of
m 147 m
course, not a drop coming up from the valley. Ivanov had
seen to that. People were allowed to drink by measure. I saw
a woman faint in the street, the day I got there, and next
day a young fellow had a kind of fit. I liked Rodin, and he
saw at once what kind of man I was. We found we had
friends in common. I was with him when a group of men
—the village storekeeper, the publican, a couple of mine
agents, and some such outsiders, came and asked him to
give up the village or take his soldiers somewhere else.
'Better give up than die of thirst,' they said. 'We'll have to
give up some time, at this rate. You said we were to trust in
God, but he doesn't send us water, so it couldn't be much
worse for us if we put our trust in Red Ivanov.' Rodin said,
'Wait five days'—
just like that—'wait five days.' He said
it so confidently and so mysteriously that the deputation
thought he'd got some idea up his sleeve. When they'd
gone I said, 'My dear Colonel, what in the world do you
expect will happen in five days? The Second Advent?' 'Oh,
anything may happen,' he said. 'I never look more than
four days ahead; the fifth day is the one I can't see, so I
always expect a good deal of it.' And that day, while he and
I were talking, Julia Arcadievna sent to ask Rodin to spare
her a few minutes. She was the widow of a man who'd died
of sunstroke during the retreat across Siberia, and there she
was drifting east with the refugees, and had somehow drifted
here—one never knew where people would turn up in
those days—but she was absolutely virtuous, my dear
Sergei Sergeievitch, absolutely virtuous."
Seryozha shifted in his chair, his big limbs tired of still-
ness. He became aware that a certain activity in the slowly
spinning room was to be identified as the appearance of
dinner. Hesaw the bottles fly upward to allow for the laying
of the cloth and then descend again, upright, like angels. He
saw blue plates settling like leaves upon the cloth. The
movements of Varvara and the servant were like a little
m 148 m
controlled wind making all these orderly displacements.
"W^at does dobbii-dyet-il-niai genstchina mean?" asked
Wilfred, but not in the manner of one who really wants
very much to know. His notebook, like the bottles and
glasses, had been mysteriously snatched to heaven, a white
cloud of cloth filled his sight, and now the notebook
alighted again, ready for use, with a full glass of champagne
beside it.
Seryozha could not remember the English words for a
virtuous woman. "Nyet singing girl," he said, uncertainly.
Katya, the servant, leaning over Pavel with a plate, said:
"Have you heard the news, Varvara Alexeievna? Piotr Gav-
rilovitch has joined the Chinese army. He wrote from
Mukden yesterday. I heard it from Olga Ivanovna's niece's
woman."
Pavel glanced with vindictiveness at his daughter. "Ha,
Tanya! News about your Petya. That disposes of another of
them, doesn't it? Tanya, you are listening to mystory, aren't
you?" He went on: "Well, Sergei Sergeievitch, when this
virtuous woman saw Rodin, she said, 'Stepan Stepanovitch,
what have you said? Five days? You have given God five
days to save us in. What blasphemy to set such a limit. If
faith can sustain us for five days, why not five hundred?
Surely we can wait on God's will for longer than five days.'
'There's such a thing as being too thirsty to trust in God,'
said Rodin. 'There's such a thing as having too dr}^ a throat
to pray with. Not for people like you and me, Julia Arca-
dievna, but for the ordinary ruck. Even five days is some-
thing. If you pray for us, perhaps something will happen to
help us, even in five days.' He had a great admiration for
Julia Arcadievna. I always say myself that women are in the
way when there's fighting to be done. If it hadn't been for all
those women and children, we could have given up our
position and tried our luck against Ivanov's men in the
valley. They outnumbered us, of course, but they were a
m H9 m
poor lot, as I knew. Still, Julia Arcadievna was a damned
handsome woman, and intelligent, too. She said: I've got
an idea. I won't tell you what it is. If it fails, nobody but
me loses anything. So don't ask me any questions, but come
to the head of the pass tonight, Stepan Stepanovitch, and
wish me luck.' 'WTiy, where will you be going?' 'Don't ask
questions, I tell you. I've always thought I was born to be
a spy.' Would you believe it, Rodin thought so much of
that woman, he let her go. He even told me he had great
faith in her. It's wonderful how good looks in women go to
men's heads. Wonderful," he repeated in a different and
savage tone, turning his white glare on his daughter.
"Rodin was a curious fellow—
a fine-looking fellow, but
quite bald," went on Pavel, stroking his own thick auburn
hair, glad to establish superiority over the hero he spoke of.
'Tlenty of hair on his upper lip, but none on his head. He
and I went to the sandbag barricade at the top of the pass
that evening—for by that time he trusted me absolutely,
and certainly it wasn't likely I should hold any more with
these revolutionaries after they'd behaved like that over
myhorses. At sunset Julia Arcadievna, with her little Korean
maid carrying a parcel, came mincing down the pass. Good
lord!—what a change! She'd put aside all her widow's
blacks and there she was in a sandy-colored Paris-looking
frock with red embroidery, and no hat or veil to hide her
pretty yellow hair. She looked stunning. She'd rouged up
her lips and blacked her eyes a little. She'd a way of
opening her eyes suddenly very wide as she looked at you.
. . . 'Let your gunners and sentries know I shall be coming
back in four days, Stepan Stepanovitch,' she said. So she
went. She went in the evening, I suppose so that she could
pretend to Ivanov's men that she'd slipped away unseen
down the pass."
"Well, did she come back?" asked Sery'ozha. The widow,
Julia Arcadievna, sounded to him almost too mature to be
M 150 m
interesting. He imagined a brazen hard-bosomed blonde of
thirty—almost an aunt's age. Ser\^ozha could just remem-
ber meeting his mother's sister in Russia before the revolu-
tion, and women admired by older men always ever since
appeared in his mind's sight as shrill, plump, vivacious old
women of twenty-nine or so.
'Tes, she came back/' said Pavel, looking almost alarmed
at the climax of his story. "She came back on the evening
of the fourth day, with a parcel."
"Well . . . she went awaywith a parcel didn't she?" said
Seryozha.
'Tes . . . but this was a different parcel—bigger and
heavier. She opened it in the presence of Rodin and me
and a lot of the men, on the terrace looking over the valley.
It was wrapped up in an ordinary army blanket. It was
Ivanov's head."
Seryozha snorted with surprise. 'Ivanov's head! Howhad
she killed him?"
"Tschah! I leave you to imagine. In a woman's way, of
course. Poor devil! Playing on his manhood. That's a
woman's way, Sergei Sergeievitch. And what do you think
she told Rodin and me? That she hadn't actually slept with
Ivanov. She hadn't even given the poor beast that satisfac-
tion. Lord! it was a disgusting thing to see her holding up
that head—
all bloody it was—with both hands, smiling a
smug, rouged, womanly smile."
"Well, what happened? I suppose the revolution didn't
stop for lack of Ivanov's head," said Seryozha, prosaically.
"No, but the troop moved off in the dawn of the next
day. I watched them go—
little lolloping specks in loose
formation. I knew why, of course
—they were nothing but
raw louts; only Ivanov held them together; they were lost
without him. Some of our miners went out along the moun-
tains and sniped them when they came to the narrow head
of the valley. They even got back some of my horses."
flJl 151 M
Van^ara watched her husband. Only she knew how little
of his story was true, and she did not mind. On the contrary,
the story seemed to her a wonderful and brilHant fruit to
have grown out of the seed of a little drab anecdote about a
miner's Yakut woman who went out spying. Nobody was
like Pavel, thought Varvara. He was her contribution to the
sum of things—and, through him, Tatiana. She made no
other contribution, and therefore had no other return. She
sat self-contained, contributing no smile, no wit, no gen-
erosity, no money, no tyranny, no song—
none of those
forms of invested capital which alone pay dividends of
friendship, fear, gratitude, love, or power. Nothing comes
to the heart that hasn't first gone horn it; Varvara knew
that. But she didn't mind, because Pavel and Tatiana were
her songs, and the voices of Pavel and Tatiana the returning
echoes of her songs.
'Is this the end of the story?" asked Wilfred, noticing
a silence, in spite of a shght fogginess of perception.
"Yist. She cutted off Bolshevik head."
"Good!" said Wilfred, feeling himself at last in posses-
sion of the facts. "Hoiosho, hoiosho," he added, nodding
brightly to Pavel.
"Did you listen to my story, Tanya?" asked Pavel, sud-
denly turning on his daughter.
"Yes, papasha."
"Agood one, wasn't it?"
"Good, but perhaps a little long," said Tatiana's mother,
hastily.
"I'm glad, at least, she kept herself clean of him," said
Tatiana between trembling lips.
"What?" roared Pavel.
The usually restrained Var\^ara suddenly made a great
noise, clapping her hands, rapping the table, speaking in
a shrill brisk voice: "Doyou know what we are going to have
for dinner? A gosling—
a gosling in honor of our young
flJJ 152 £iIJ
cousin/' She looked desperately at her husband and spoke
more loudly still: "Oh, so good—you'll never guess how
good, Pavlik! . . . You've all been talking so long, you men,
that Katya and I had plenty of time to roast it to a turn.
A gosling—
a gosling—oh so good!" She banged the table
for her husband's attention.
"What is she saying?" asked Wilfred, startled.
"She speak, we bite goose for dinner."
"My goodness gracious!" breathed Wilfred. "I thought
she was announcing some calamity. So loud." He looked
ruefully at his notebook, for the sudden noise had caused
his shocked hand to make a little blot in the middle of one
page of his neat writing.
Pavel, though his impulse of anger was a little softened
by the goose, would not allow his attention to be entirely
distracted by his wife's irrelevance. "Very well done, Va-
ritchka. Agosling. Very good. But, Tanya—what was your
comment on my stor)^?"
Tatiana was silent. "Tanya made no comment," said
Varvara.
Yet in Seryozha's hearing was ringing quite clearly the
comment that Tatiana had made. Vmglad, at least, she kept
herself clean of him. What a curious word—clean—he
thought, and his thoughts went round and round it in a
slow spin. Clean—clean—clean . . . women clean of
men—men clean of women. He was young enough to be
very impressionable by words, and the word clean did not
strike him as being a euphemism for something much less
attractive. On the contrary, in his present thin-spun, rare-
fied, wine-blessed mood, it seemed to him to express an
ideal of some sort. That was the word that fitted his own
rare moon-washed feeling—that hunger in the presence of
quietness and color for something that would not appease
the demands of either stomach, brain, or sex. Poor Ser-
yozha! He almost recognized that hunger of his at that
ffl 153 ffil
moment, though he could give it no other word than dean.
It was his body hungering to be free of talk and understand-
ing—hungering to be a bit of world, a blade of grass, a
tiger—anything that was not dirtied by talk and thought.
Everything between men and women was dirty—except
one thing. "That girl—
one could eat that girl, and remain
clean," thought Seryozha.
He was obsessed with the image of hunger, since the
gosling had been mentioned.
'Tanya," said Varvara, clearing away the zakusJca, "come
and help me dish up the goose."
The two women went to the door. As Tatiana passed
Seryozha, he expected her to smile at him; he felt so sure
that an understanding had been established between them,
that she would be grateful to him for so keenly appreciating
her word clean. But she did not smile at all. She walked
past him, meeting his eager eyes without a change of ex-
pression, grave, blank, as though thinking of something else.
And so strange was the chill that this blank look gave him,
that his memory, shocked, threw back to the context of her
remark, and he knew instantly that he had entirely mis-
understood her words. She kept herself clean oi him. By
clean she meant cold, dead—
all life was dirty to her. Her
ideal was coldness. No tiger of life could hunger for that
white unsmiling ghost. Ser}'ozha thought, "If I had her,
she'd melt like ice in m.y arms—she'd be clean of me,
then." The word cold occurred to him many times—cold
—cold—cold—before he realized what it suggested to
him, and then he got up, a little unsteadily, and followed
mother and daughter toward the kitchen. In the passage
he paused beside where his pack of possessions hung on a
peg. As he unstrapped the buckle of the pack he heard
Wilfred, in the sitting-room, begin to entertain Pavel Osta-
penko in a bright voice. Wilfred was not sober enough to
mind that his host did not understand a word that he was
m 154 flffl
saying; his automatic reaction to the silence was an impulse
to emit information. Pavel was not sober enough to mind
not understanding, and in any case he had something else
to think of.
"The Japanese police, Mr. Ozz . .
/' said Wilfred, "show
themselves indeed marticrats—(marticrats? Yes, mauto-
nets)—
to travelers crossing the border, and at one point I
really began to think, I really began to think that I really
began to think—oh, well, Mr. Ozzabanko, you know all
that without really beginning to think—
I mean, without
my telling you. But being a barrister-at-law of the Middle
Temple, London, I could say to them. . . . And the Dia-
mond Mountains—Kongo-san—though honeysuckled
with soup—
I mean soupstition—su-per-stit-ion—Saggay
Sagga}itch said 'Buddhanok on ever}^ up-look,' twelve thou-
sand peaks, you know, but not really more than—well—
what would be a conservatory estimate?" He began to think
ver\' deeply.
Ser}ozha in the passage took out of his pack the little
smelly package that contained the heart, gall, and liver of
the fish he had caught at Pa-tao-kou. It was in a perfectly
disgusting condition, yet to Ser)^ozha the smell was a smell
of fate and magic; ever}^thing that Wilfred had said about
it seemed to fit the circumstances so well. Blindness. Wom-
an's coldness. Real magic indeed. The thing must have
other powers besides its powerful smell. With his clasp-
knife he cut a small piece from the heart and another small
piece from the liver, and then, wrapping the rest in its paper,
he replaced it in his pack. The two small flabby chunks he
concealed in his hand and, striding into the kitchen,
dropped them in the fire.
"\\Tiat a curious smell!" said Van^ara at once. Tatiana,
pouring sauce into a bowl on the table, made no comment.
She held her body too upright—almost bent a little back-
ward; her head was high and she was looking down over
flJl 155 ffl
her pale cheeks at the sauce as though she despised it.
Really she was thinking of Seryozha's skin. As he had stood
for a second at the fireplace, she had noticed that the skin at
the back of his neck was not pitted or pimpled like Sasha's
or Petya's. This meant a great deal to her. His neck was as
neat as the fur of a dog, or the charming behind of a well-
kept horse, she thought.
The servant, Katya, seized the dish that bore the gosling
in her brawny bare arms and carried it towards the sitting-
room. Varvara followed with the vegetables.
Tatiana still stood at the table, but now, instead of look-
ing down at the sauce, she looked sidelong at Seryozha,
soberly tightening her lips.
"Why do you look like that, Tatiana Pavlovna?" asked
Seryozha, holding the corner of the table, for he felt ex-
tremely dizzy.
Tatiana was silent for an unexpectedly long second, and
then, "O Christ!" she exclaimed in a high sudden voice.
"Can I not even look like myself without being asked ques-
tions—without surprising somebody, offending somebody,
hurting somebody's feelings, making somebody reproach
me? Even if I do nothing—good or bad—only just be
—my being's not allowed."
"Who doesn't allow it?" asked Seryozha, swaying over
the table toward her, feeling very uneasy.
"You—
papa—mamma—Petya—Sasha. Why do you
look like that, Tanya? Why do you do like that, Tanya?
Whyare you alive in that way, Tanya? Why aren't you
alive in this way, Tanya? What can I do less than just be
born, breathe, and at last die? I'm not attacking, not pre-
tending... I just am. I only ask to leave you all alone
and be left alone."
"Oh, not be left alone, surely!" exclaimed Seryozha,
shocked to imagine such a small creature growing old alone.
"No, not to be left alone any more than a common
l!lil3 156 filiJ
sparrow is left alone because it is a sparrow/' said Tatiana,
violently. "J^st to be allowed to walk on the earth in my
natural way, as a sparrow is allowed to fly in the air. No
bird cuts its throat for the sake of another bird. No father
bird nags at his egg for just lying quiet in the nest."
They both smiled for a second or two at this.
"I could leave you alone/' said Seryozha. "God knows
it's a thing I ought to understand. I only want things to
walk about and fly about by themselves. ... I like my dog
to go on laughing at his own jokes without me. . . . What
am I saying? I'd never cut my throat for anybody, Tatiana
Pavlovna."
"Come, children, come," called Varvara from the sitting-
room.
But as Tatiana and Seryozha, carrying plates and sauce,
joined their elders, Pavel said, "Here's this snake of a daugh-
ter of mine . . . here's this virtuous murderous heroine
coming back with the head of a new murdered lover in her
"
hands. Here's this
"Pavlik! Pavlik! Think! Think!" said Varvara, in a low
violent voice.
"Come, everybody," she added, clapping her hands with
a relapse into her unnatural shrill vivacity. "Gosling to eat
—good goshng to eat. Come and eat gosling."
"I won't eat," said Seryozha, suddenly seizing the end of
the table and bending, with an insolent but tremulous grin,
toward his host and hostess—"I won't eat until you say I
can marry Tanya. Please, Mr. Chew, help me. Oh, but,
damn it, he can't speak the language! Well, there it is. . . .
Pavel Nicholaievitch, may I marry your daughter?"
"God bless you, why not?" shouted Pavel. "I've told you
the truth once and I'll tell it to you again. She's been be-
trothed seven times and all seven men are dead—dead,
aren't they, Tanya? Or if not all, what do you care? She
kills lovers for pleasure. She bites them when they kiss her.
ffi 157 ffil
She slits their throats when they touch her. She cuts off their
heads when"
'Tavlik! Pavlik!" said \^arvara. 'Think/ You are talking
nonsense/'
"Well, you can't say I haven't told you the truth, young
man. Mydaughter's a snake. If you want a snake for a wife
—God bless you, boy, you can follow the rest. I'll dig your
grave in my meadow tomorrow. Nevertheless, for the pres-
ent, be merry. .
."
"I won't eat till it's all properly arranged and signed,"
cried Seryozha, bravely, though his heart sank. This was the
first transaction he had ever made all by himself, and he
felt dimly that it was not being made in the grown-up,
business-like way he would have wished to boast of to his
mother. "Mr. Chew, listen. Ah, tschah! Mr. Chewis asleep!"
For Wilfred, overcome by the wine, sat forward, his body
telescoped upon itself, his elbows wide, his hands clasped
upon his plate, his chin on his hands. His eyes had been
shut, but now, as he heard his name, he opened them and
rolled them roguishly at Seryozha. He opened his mouth,
too, and waved his tongue, but no words came forth. He
tapped his notebook with an idiotic significance.
There was a pause. Varvara looked nervously at her
speechless guest. Pavel did not seem to notice Mr. Chew's
unusual demeanor, but he drew the notebook from beneath
his guest's plate and focused his frowning eyes on it at
arm's-length, inviting Seryozha to read over his shoulder.
With care, Pavel, who was accustomed to reading English
newspapers, could read what Wilfred had written. It was
this:
THIS INDENTURE made the twenty-seventh day of Septem-
ber One Thousand nine hundred and twenty-eight BETWEEN
SERGEI SERGEIEVITCH MALININ of Chi-tao-kou in the
Province of Kirin Manchuria timber worker (hereinafter called
tSi 158 325
the husband which expression shall unless the context other-
wise determine herein include his heirs executors administrators
and assigns) of the first part TATIANA PAVLOVNA OSTA-
PENKO of Mi-san Korea Spinster (hereinafter called the wife
which expression shall unless the context otherwise determine
herein include her heirs executors administrators and assigns)
of the second part WILFRED CHEW (CH'U WEI-FU) of
the Middle Temple London England Barrister-at-Law (here-
inafter called the Agent which expression shall unless the con-
text otherwise determine include his heirs executors adminis-
trators and assigns) of the third part and PAVEL NICHO-
LAIEVITCH OSTAPENKO of Mi-san in Korea Equitable
Merchant (hereinafter described as the settlor which expression
shall unless the context otherwise determine herein include his
heirs executors administrators and assigns) of the fourth part
WHEREAS a marriage is intended shortly to be consummated
between the husband and the wife AND WHEREAS the said
marriage has been arranged so to be consummated as aforesaid
at the suggestion and with the assistance of the agent NOWin
consideration of the services rendered and to be rendered (at
the desire express or implied of the parties hereto other than the
agent) in the premises by the agent THIS INDENTURE
WITNESSETH that the settlor agrees to pay to the agent on
the consummation of such marriage as aforesaid the following
sums (that is to say) Yioo (one hundred Yen) in consideration
of his services in arranging the said marriage and Y50 (fifty
Yen) in consideration of professional services in the negotia-
tion preparation and execution of these presents AND in con-
sideration of the natural love and affection of the husband for
the wife and of divers other good and valuable considerations
him hereunto moving and enabling THIS INDENTURE
FURTHERWITNESSETHANDIT IS HEREBYAGREED
AND DECLARED AS FOLLOWS
1. The said husband agrees to accept the said wife as his wife
and to support her as such in that state of life to which it
m 159 m
has pleased God to call her to have and/or to hold to love
and/or to cherish until death do her part (NOTEfill in formal
parts as respects wife)
2. The husband further agrees in consideration as aforesaid to
settle on the said wife by will or otherwise within a reasonable
period of time the sum of Y250 (two hundred and fifty Yen)
at present at his disposal and/or under his control in the Bank
of Chosen Seoul.
3. And in consideration of the love and affection of the said
Settlor for the said wife and in further consideration of the
natural gratitude of the said settlor to the said husband for
offering the said marriage in spite of the 7 (seven) previous
unfortunate circumstances the said settlor agrees on the con-
summation as aforesaid to pay as dowry the sum of ¥2,000 (two
thousand Yen) to the said husband
Nothing in this Deed shall disentitle the said agent from receiv-
ing any sum of money thereunder or from charging his reason-
able professional fees in connection therewith IN WITNESS
whereof the parties hereto have hereunto set their respective
hands and seals the day and year first above written (NOTE
Query add clause re agent performing Wesleyan marriage cere-
mony query Y25 fee)
Wilfred Chew, Barrister-at-law.
"But I don't understand," said Pavel, suddenly realizing
that he was drunk. "Have we talked about this before?"
"Not we, but he," said Seryozha, sheepishly. "He talked
of it several times—being a friend of both of us. I took little
notice of him, as at that time I didn't consider myself a
marrying man. He's a good chap. Chew," added Seryozha,
sentimentally. "Of course being a Chinese and a lav^er,
he must drive a bargain. But he is a good honest chap.
Twice he lent me his blanket, when I was cold after swim-
ming. I shall sign this. I have sworn not to eat until I have
signed something, and I am very hungry." He wrote his
££8 160 flu
name on the paper, his tongue-tip writing in the air above
the pen.
"We will not sign it till tomorrow," said Varvara. She
could not read the agreement, but she was dubiously watch-
ing her husband's glazed red face.
'Tanya and I will sign it now," said Pavel, the uncertain
lines of his face stiffening all at once to obstinacy. 'It's not
every day one gets the chance to have a hero for a son-in-
law."
Hesplashed his signature under Seryozha's large blotched
name. 'Tanya," he added, putting the pen into his daugh-
ter's hand.
For a moment Tanya wrote with it on the air, as though
in a dream. Her father and mother watched her. Seryozha
paused childishly, with his mouth full, to watch her. Her
lips were set in a little smile. She leaned back in her chair
and looked down her cheeks at the paper. Then she wrote
her name in tiny letters—Tatiana Pavlovna Ostapenko, and
under her name she suddenly drew a little alert picture of a
sparrow taking flight.
Her father looked guiltily at the signatures and the draw-
ing. He folded up the paper and put it in his pocket. "Ah,
tschah!" he said, as he seized a new bottle of champagne.
"It means nothing. We still have tomorrow. . . . Varit-
chka, let's eat your goose."
iM m
•Y«Y*V«1 /•?•••
CHAPTER NINE
From the moment of Sewozha's departure from Chi-tao-
kou, Anna's world seemed filled with an entirely new air.
One would have said that Seryozha must have filled the
house as completely as a snail fills its shell—
so convoluted,
so entire was the emptiness he left, from floor to ceiling,
from wall to wall. Out of doors, looking through Anna's
eyes, one would have guessed her son a bright obscuring
light—
so bleakly new and hard and shadowless was every
leaf, every hill, every silly angle of the street, lacking even
the possibility of his presence. It was a world lit, as it were,
by indirect lighting under low clouds, instead of by the
honest bland sun.
Anna's son, ever since his birth, had always been within
a few miles of her, and now those few miles, empty of him
—
a cube of featureless summer air—boxed her in, a
prisoner. She could not spontaneously imagine his return.
With a mental effort she could invent elaborate scenes of
his homecoming, but she knew them to be artificial, knew
them to be constructed with ingenuity rather than with faith
and hope. Such scenes were always shattered by her convic-
tion of premonition. 'Absurd! ... He will never come
flJJ 162 fSl[
back. . .
." Everyinch of the earth is, after all, so dangerous.
Here, where we stand, a minute or a million years ago, some
heart failed. There, at that point to which our dear love is
hurrying, the lightning struck, the germ of plague was born,
the tree will fall, the flood will surge, the murderer will
stab—
a minute or a million years hence—
a minute or a
million years ago. Living is a matter of missing death by a
—
hair's-breadth or an aeon
it doesn't matter which—and
dying is a matter of coincidence. If we knew the past and
the future of every yard of every path we tread, or of every
stone our dear love's foot turns over as he goes, where should
we turn for peace? Once we have realized the billions of
deaths and horrors that have been, the billions that will be,
every inch of the world seems soaked in blood. Every inch
of the world, it seemed to Anna, was haunted by the ghost
of a son whose mother had let him go. "Even at this very
second, perhaps, his foot is lifted for his last stride."
"Why should you be so pessimistic, Annitchka?" asked
Old Sergei, who had rather relaxed his attitudes during this
period of acute domestic discomfort, and lived now in an
emotional deshabille, content to be seen as Old Sergei
Malinin at last. "Hundreds of young men have made the
very journey that he is making and have come back safely.
Indeed, our Seryozha is doubly safe, since he has a reliable
man with him." He spoke to reassure himself as well as his
wife, since her chronic conviction of a fatal presentiment
affected him, too. He kept secretly in his pocket a knotted
string, making a new knot for every day that brought no
news of his son, in order that he might not have to irritate
his wife by asking her to verify his calculations by the cal-
endar. Apart from this tiny effort of ingenuity. Old Sergei
had become, in a few days, very much more helpless than
ever before. The necessity for posing as a father being now
past, he had shrunk and withered into immobility, as flow-
ers, dry and forgotten in the emptyvase, hardly respond, ex-
IfflJ 163 tSi
cept by an unlovely rattle, to the moving air that used to
swing their bright heads. Old Sergei expressed by his wist-
ful avoidance of authority his craving to be at last old, to be
nursed, to be pitied, to have nothing more expected of him.
"Ah, why did you send him away?" said Anna, turning
on the old man. *'He was our life—
our crutch; we're noth-
ing but a couple of old bags of bones without him. You
know what a dangerous, lawless country this is for a Rus-
sian, yet you were so greedy to add money to money.. . .
Why, money's dirt compared with the safety of our Ser-
yozha. The money we had was enough; we lived very well;
we were happy enough."
"Don't worry yourself so, Annitchka. It's folly to worry
so
—besides, it worries me. The boy's not gone far; he'll
be back again in no time; we shall see him one of these days
coming in at that door as usual—
or rather, you'll see him,
since I am so afflicted."
"I shall never see him again," said Anna, looking at the
door, trying to force her imagination to reconstruct the
prow of his long shadow, coming in at the door, like a ship
into harbor.
"Oh, very well, then, worry—worry. You take pleasure
in worrying both yourself and me. Cry yourself sick if you
like."
But Anna was not crying. She never cried. Her eyebrows
were hitched up, her forehead strained into wrinkles, there
was a little taut pain in the top of her head; these things,
with her, took the place of tears. Sometimes she could al-
most have prayed to her muscles. Let go! Let go! Let go!
Her eyes, her brow, and the little sore tiptoe yawning feel-
ing inside the top of her skull seemed to be caught, hooked,
seemed to have forgotten how to relax.
Poor Old Sergei was certainly a most uncomfortable old
man at that time. His wife could hardly bear him, and yet
she was not so cruel to him as she would have liked to be.
flffl 164 m
Kindness was, as it were, at each extremity of her behavior
to him; the core of her feehng was kindness and she tossed
an exasperated kindness from her finger tips. This surface
kindness made her buy him things he liked to eat and serve
them with muffled curses, which, being misheard by him,
she would change to words of half-ironic gentleness. But
between the core and the surface of her mood there was a
dark, tortuous area of weariness and hatred of his plaintive-
ness, his meanness, the contradiction of life that he was. In
this intervening confusion of her nature she suffered a sort
of contrariness, a doubling back, that made her challenge
herself unconsciously to be cruel—
to try him a little more
—
a httle more—
a little more (will he stand it?)—a little
more still (almost like a murderess daring herself to press a
trigger)—till he would suddenly feel the prick of her in-
sult, and lose his temper and his dignity. Then she would
feel acutely guilty, talk to him gently with elaborate harm-
lessness, answer his meandering talk for a little while, until
the obscurely revengeful impulse came back to hurt him
again—
a little—
a little more—
a little more still. . . .
She would wrench his rheumatic fingers with a half-
deliberate pinch as she guided his hand to his food, and
then, when he cried out, impulsively and genuinely beg his
pardon, pretending, even to herself, that it had been a
clumsy accident. She would sit and look at him, grinding
her teeth because he was not his son, and all the time make
wounding or humiliating retorts to his plaintive prattle. He
was not very acute and did not often perceive that he was
being worse treated than usual; he only thought that Anna
seemed clumsier and stupider than usual, more misunder-
standing in her talk and more abrupt in her movements.
And, seeing his obtuseness, that strange contrary cruelty in
the soft Anna would gloat over its opportunity—the tor-
menting of a creature too silly to recognize the instrument
of torment—"how safe... no one will ever know of this
iJffl 165 fflB
... no one but me . .
." Then, in the night, she would
suddenly wake up, frozen with self-disgust, beat her head
with her palm, and throw herself upon her husband, crying:
"My darling, Tmsorry, Fmsorry! Forgive me. Whata beast
I am!" To Old Sergei these violent night-scenes of remorse
were much more disturbing than the subtle discomfort of
his days.
In order partly to be away as much as possible from her
lonely house, and partly to save her old husband frOm her-
self, Anna pretended that she had a lot of work to do for
Mrs. Butters during the first week of Seryozha's absence.
Really the preparations for the Butters baby were finished
now, and Anna was only needed at the mission once a week
to help with the darning and mending. Yet every morning,
after breakfast, she would murmur a vague word or two
about Mrs. Butters's sewing and disappear, leaving bread,
cheese, and beer ready on the table for her husband's noon
meal. Old Sergei would sit drooping alone all day in the
street doorway. He had charge of the sale of a few packages
of cheap Russian and Japanese cigarettes, matches, sweets,
biscuits, bottles of lemonade and clay pipes that were ar-
ranged on a couple of trestles outside the living-room door
—the last ligOT mortis of his dead shop. But only two or
three customers a day spent a few sen on his goods and all
day he would sit, half in and half out of his door, listening
to the shouts of Korean and Chinese children playing,
listening to the thin whine of the Japanese photographer
next door singing over his work, listening to the clop-ker-
clop of the senseless facetious gamboling of the mission kid
in the yard behind the house, listening to the unfailing ac-
companiment of wails, cries, and squeals of thwarted and
hurt animals that is always in the background of the hearing
in every Chinese town. Sometimes the lonely old manwould
spend hours trying to lure within reach a dog that he could
hear panting and snuffling and snapping at flies and ticks
fiJJ 166 fSli
across the street. With a bait of crusts or show of imaginary
food, he would patiently fish for the animal, only for the
pleasure of touching its rough neck and shoulders when at
last it trusted him enough to approach him—touching its
mangy ribs, its furtive tail, feeling the drip of sweat from its
hanging tongue, assuring himself morbidly of the presence
of another prisoner like himself, another life within another
lean, sad, and elusive body.
The first day of Seryozha's absence, Anna's only impulse
in leaving her home was to walk a little way along the path
that he had trodden. Perhaps she might see the print of his
big shoes or find something that he had dropped—the stub
of a cigarette or the paper that had wrapped pirozhki. Per-
haps she might learn something about him from a Korean
peasant or Chinese peddler who had seen him passing by.
At any rate, she could see things that he had seen—notice
the patched crops upon the hills, the sharp rocks that slit
with a short gash of foam the smooth-running surface of
the river, the thin shade under which he had perhaps rested,
the bloomy dazzle of reeds in the shallows, the fantastic
duplication of crags—reared in groups, as nearly alike as the
chimneys of one house—halfway round the horizon, the
farm dogs that must have barked at him, that great scrawny
sow, dragging her unbeautiful dugs through the dust, that
must have made him laugh yesterday. Probably he remem-
bered, when he saw that, that his mother had once said that
the fat pink mission school on the hill, flanked at right
angles by a neat row of little pink mission houses, looked
like a sow suckling its young. She felt for a moment as if
she were actually sharing a laugh with her Seryozha, and she
stood staring hungrily at the sow until the poor beast looked
almost embarrassed.
Then she noticed, sitting on a stone near the river, that
young Russian who had lately walked up from Seoul—
Alexander Petrovitch Weber. This young man, a plain,
flJJ 167 flJJ
sad, gawky creature enough, radiated beauty in Anna's eyes,
because she knew that he and Seryozha had met. Seryozha
had even brought him to the house the day before yesterday
when she had been busy over the washing. Seryozha had,
she beheved, hked him, and this boy had doubtless been
dehghted by Seryozha. It seemed as if some scrap of Ser-
yozha's darhng personahty had been grafted upon this
young man.
She therefore walked towards him, feeling fat andhumble
and ungainly, as she had felt ever since she had lost sight of
Seryozha. She must be tentative and a little self-conscious
with every one now, since there was no one in Chi-tao-kou
to justify her existence—
no son before whom she could
feel, "Well, I mayn't be beautiful, but this splendid crea-
ture calls me Mother." She approached Alexander Weber,
conscious of her waddle and of her splay shoes, one of
which was slit over one toe to accommodate a corn.
Alexander Weber was very tall and lanky, black-haired
and sallow, with a big nose, abrupt cheek-bones and gener-
ally prominent features—among which an assertive Adam's
apple seemed to hold its own, almost as though it were a
second attempt at a chin. He had a very gentle look in his
dark eyes—
a look which he withdrew from the river and
focused, as though with difficulty, on the approaching Anna.
"My son—Sergei Sergeievitch Malinin, you know—
started for Seoul yesterday."
"I know," said Alexander, rising politely, though indif-
ferently, from his boulder. "I thought of going with him."
"Going with him? Why, you have only just come from
there, surely!" said Anna.
"Yes," said the young man, dreamily.
"He hasn't anything like the spirit, the vitality, of my
Seryozha," thought Anna, gladly. She added, aloud, "Had
you hoped to find work in Chi-tao-kou. I'm afraid there is
little for Russians to do here, especially for a young man like
£23 168 tSi
you, that would be worth while. Is that why you thought of
leaving so soon? Or are you not well lodged?"
"I am on my way up to Harbin/' he said. "There is always
a chance of a job on the railway there. Oh yes, I am well
enough lodged. I am with Nikitin, the droschki man. He
even let me earn something yesterday, driving an American
missionary to Erh-tao-kou in a dwschkiJ'
"On your way to Harbin?" exclaimed Anna. "Why, you
have just said you considered going back to Seoul."
"Yes," said Alexander, straying into his dream again. "I
am not really sure what I want to do."
"Perhaps you have left some one you are fond of in
Seoul, and are worrying about her," suggested Anna, gently.
"Your mother, perhaps." A mother, it seemed to her at the
moment, was the only thing that a youngman could reason-
ably worry about.
"Yes, I have left my mother," answered Alexander,
patiently. "But she has other sons. I have left mybetrothed,
too. Or rather, she was mybetrothed; she is not so now. She
is a dreadful creature."
"A dreadful creature?" exclaimed Anna, surprised.
"Yes, dreadful. Would you beheve it, Anna Semionovna?
—she—she forgets in a minute—
even while you are speak-
ing—what you are speaking about. She will say—'One
moment, Sasha, I must just take this basket to my mother,'
and one waits—
w^aits—waits—half an hour—
an hour—
and at last one goes to find out what has happened. There
she is, whistling, shelling peas in her mother's kitchen. 'But,
Tanya,' you say—and then you see that she has forgotten.
Forgotten that I was waiting—that I was in the middle of
telling her something—
I
—her betrothed! Sometimes, too,
when I meet her unexpectedly, I can see that, for a moment,
she doesn't know who I am . . . even the face of her be-
trothed she has forgotten. It is not to be borne."
iJlJl 169 flU
"Howextraordinary!" exclaimed Anna. "What a heartless
woman/'
"Heartless! Heartless, you say! She is as heartless as death.
She is not alive. Sometimes I think she really hates anything
that is alive. And it is not as if she were really very irresisti-
ble. She can't afford this behavior—
if she doesn't look out
she'll never get a husband."
"Perhaps that would be as well," said Anna. "Since she
couldn't make a man happy."
"Happy! Happy, you say! She is death to any man that
loves her. Seven men have loved her—and where are they
now? She has a pretty face, certainly, but any one who loves
her loves death. One may walk side by side with her and
feel that a river runs between her and oneself—like remem-
bering some one who is dead. She has red hair and very thin
hands. Once I took hold of her hand—caressingly, as a
man does take the hand of his girl—and when she tried to
snatch it away, I held it
—in fun, you know—
surely a man
may do that. . . . Anna Semionovna, she bit me—
really
deeply—in the wrist. I was quite revolted. I walked away.
After half an hour she ran after me. She holds her head like
this . . . and her hair comes unpinned when she runs. She
runs very lightly. When I heard her coming, I thought:
'Well, at least something is gained. She can be near enough
to a man to be angry with him—and then to come and beg
his pardon.' And so she did beg my pardon—but what do
you think? In begging my pardon she shook hands, lightly
and politely, as one wouldshake a stranger's hand . . . then
she drew her hand away, and seemed to imagine that no
hurt remained. . .
."
"Well, you are well rid of her," said Anna.
"Yes, indeed," replied Alexander, instantly far awayagain,
fixing his gentle, black, shortsighted gaze across the river.
There was a pause.
tSU 170 fflj
"Of course a moment of passion like that is not live pas-
sion, as it would be in a live woman. Fm sure it is not a sign
of life. No man has ever seen a sign of life in her, though
seven menhave loved her—
poor devils. Her hair is a bright
dark red; that is supposed to be a passionate color for a
woman's hair—but like the rest of her beauty, it lies. She
is always polite. She can whistle to bring tears into your
eyes—
so soft—so strong—though of course whistling is
not a suitable gift for a woman. But she's not a woman—
that's why she's death to a man. I say, 'Whistle for me,
Tanya/ and she whistles—for she is most polite and kind
in doing whatever little thing you ask of her—but it is not
for meshe whistles; she whistles for the sky—for something
far away. Such a girl, who can do nothing but whistle, and
talk about cold fancies, and shake hands, and bite a manwho
has a right to caress her—well, her beauty is wasted, isn't
it, Anna Semionovna? If you can call it beauty; I am not
even sure that one could call her beautiful."
"She is not worth another thought," said Anna.
"No, indeed," said Alexander, looking at her with wet
eyes and a guilty half smile. "It is a joy to be away from
her, and to be with full-blooded men and women, after
knowing such a dangerous ghost of a girl."
Anna had for several minutes been bored with the subject
of Tanya. "What a pity that my son left Chi-tao-kou just
as you arrived. Hecould perhaps have found you work in the
timber-yard. There are so few young fellows of his own age
in this region for him to have as friends. Though you are a
little older. Still, you would have liked him, I am sure, if you
had known him better."
"Yes, it is a pity. It is a terrible pity that I did not think
of going down to Seoul with him. I wish I had. I wonder if
he will go by Mi-san."
"I never heard of Mi-san," said Anna. "Is it one of the
towns on his way to Seoul?"
tS& 171 MS
"Almost on his way. Notmore than, say, twelve hours out
of his way if he goes on foot. If he goes by train, it is about
three hours' walk from the railway."
"Well, whyshould he go there? Is the place of any special
interest?"
Alexander, feeling that perhaps he had mentioned Tanya
two or three times too many, and might have led this old
woman to suppose that he was romantically interested in
the hated girl, assumed an odd, secretive manner. "I do not
think Mi-san is in the least interesting," he said. "To be
sure, there are some mounds which—well, a Russian horse-
dealer whose name I do not care to mention—
a man who
lives there—
says are prehistoric and must contain relics of
the past. But what live man cares for such dead things?
Then there is a magic well which the Koreans say cures a
thousand and one ills
—but I think every sick man who
drinks there must be suffering from the thousand and
second ill
—for I have never heard of a cure. Whatis more,
Mi-san is a downright ugly village; one large tree, to be sure
—but trees are commonerin Korea than here in Manchuria.
The houses there are common-looking, the street filthy and
dusty. A particularly unattractive village indeed."
"Then I am sure Seryozha will not go twelve hours out of
his way to visit it. Hehas seen too many ugly dirty villages."
"No, certainly he will not. He would be much wiser not
to. I only mentioned it because, if one starts from Seoul by
the late tourists' train—the Gensan train—
one can arrive
in the small hours at Choan-san and, by walking quickly, be
in Mi-san by breakfast-time, spend two-thirds of the day
there, and walk back to the railway in time to catch the
tourists' day train back to Seoul—in this way only missing
one day's work."
"But Seryozha would not dream of doing such a thing to
visit an unattractive village in which he knows no one."
Anna looked at Alexander, her fat face screwed up with
£li3 172 fiJJ
pity for this sad, gawky, inferior substitute for a son. "Per-
haps, my dear, Mi-san is where your horrid Tanya hves/'
"Tanya? What Tanya? Oh, I had forgotten her," said
Alexander in confusion. "Ah yes, now I come to think of it,
she does happen to live at Mi-san—
I mean Tanya, this
dreadful girl I mentioned to 3^ou. What of it? One knows
so many girls. . . they all have to live somewhere. . .
."
Anna saw his Adam's apple moving up and down. His
very plainness seemed to her, in her over-sensitized mood,
most heartbreaking.
"Alexander Petrovitch," she said. "Won't you come and
live with my husband and me while our son is away?"
"Good God, no!" said Alexander, shutting his eyes as
though he had been struck. "I mean—
excuse me, Anna
Semionovna—
I hardly know what I am saying. I meant to
say, thank you \'ery much for your kindness, but" (his voice
broke as he realized that he was being pitied)—"but I must
stay with the Nikitins. I am not very well just now. ... I
have a touch of dysentery, I think. This pain in the pit of
mystomach goes on and on.. .
."
"You could have Seryozha's room," said Anna, ardently,
hiccoughing with anxiety. "I can make a kind of gruel with
arrowroot that would"
"No—
no—no!" said Alexander, and swung his clasped
hands, as though in an agony of prayer, up from between
his knees to his chin and down again. He looked intensely
away across the river, and beat himself on his big mouth to
steady his lips. After a long moment he said, in a high firm
voice, "Have you ever noticed how few young Korean girls
wear blue? They wear pink, green, yellow, white, but never
blue. They don't seem to have noticed how pretty a young
girl can look in blue."
"No, they don't wear blue," said Anna, sighing gustily.
"But Chinese young girls wear nothing but blue."
63 173 32
"Ah, but they wear trousers. Chinese coohe cloth made
into trousers has an ugly effect. Stiff and ugly—not swing-
ing out when they dance or run. . . . Besides, they don't
wash it enough to let it fade to that cloudy. . . cloudy
blue. . .
." He sat so long without saying anything more
that Anna realized that she might as well leave him.
"Well, Alexander Petrovitch," she said, feeling nothing
but a useless, clumsy old woman again, "remember that I
invited you.. . . You may change your mind. . .
."
Alexander did not seem to have heard her. His eyes were
fixed upon her stockings, which were of a light gray. Alex-
ander felt that he was haunted by light-gray stockings—
since Tatiana always wore them. Every woman seemed to
flaunt a cruel parody of Tatiana's slim dancing gray legs,
and ever}^ time he saw gray legs he felt as though something
emotionally final had happened—whether hopeful or hope-
less it was impossible to say. It was as if Tatiana had stepped
across his vision. Even the station master at Gensan, by
wearing gray socks, had stabbed Alexander Weber's heart
hotand cold. Even the piers of the dock at Gensan, bleached
with sun and sea, had made him feel, "Is she coming—has
she gone?" though he did not realize why.
Anna walked away. The sow was now suckling her ten
ridiculous little balloons of babies, but taking no notice of
them—not fussing about them with the loving attentive-
ness other mothers show. The sow's soul seemed to be lost
in that huge mound of a body; her body was an outhing
region, only very sparsely colonized with the germs of con-
sciousness, only nominally under the government of some
little vital citadel of egoism in the soul of the sow^ That
great sw^ollen body did w^hat it had to do—conceived
young, suckled its young, rooted its jaws drearily in mud,
shoveled food in under its snout, moved the stiff, overbur-
dened props of its legs—but all these dull doings were un-
ffii 174 m
inspired by spirit. Only the tail, knotting and squirming
tautly, seemed to have some more direct communication
with the sow's remote inner hfe.
Anna laughed delightedly as she imagined herself nursing
ten little Seryozhas. "With any other husband 1 should have
had four at least—
even though I was thirty-five when I
married/' she thought. "Then I could have kept three at
home with me all the time, and Seryozha could have
traipsed off as far as he liked."
Then suddenly she began walking home very fast, tearing
at the armholes of her dress because they were too tight for
such rapid movement. She had remembered that Seryozha
had not packed the little phial of castor oil she had filled
for him out of the big bottle. She made a wild plan to hire
a droschki and get Alexander Weber to drive it. Seryozha
and Wilfred would by now be about halfway from Pa-tao-
kou to their night's stop—thirty miles from here, perhaps
. . . a dwschki with a good horse. . . . "It is most im-
portant," she assured herself. "Castor oil has saved lives
before now. I could leave the old man plenty of cheese and
bread, and get that Lai woman to come in and heat up the
potatoes tonight.. .
/'
She hurried into the kitchen. Old Sergei was sitting at
the table, running his fingers through the heads of a bunch
of zinnias he had picked in the yard.
"I am going to drive after Seryozha," said Anna, in a
hasty, defiant voice. "It is most important. I can get a
droschki. I shall only be away till tomorrow noon, I dare
say.. . . He left something most important behind . . .
that little bottle of castor oil. It might easily be a matter of
life and death—eating at these filthy Korean inns. . .
."
"The castor oil?" exclaimed Old Sergei, looking dizzy.
"He took the castor oil with him. He was packing his pack
in here while you were cooking piwzhkiy and he said, 'Tell
mamma I have put the castor oil in, since she makes such
KB 175 ffl
a point of it. Look, in here' he said, forgetting that I
cannot look at castor oil or anything else/'
"He forgot it, I tell you/' shouted Anna, in a wild voice.
She rushed to the shelf which had been the rendezvous of
Seryozha's accumulation for the journey. She stood looking
at the bare shelf for a moment, in a silence broken only by
one loud sad hiccough. "Then, if he didn't forget it, why
didn't you tell me before, you old fool—
you silly old fool
—
you heartless old fool of a father? But why should you
care? You send your only son away into the desert without
a qualm—selling him for money—for a paltr}^ two hun-
dred yen.. . . Whyshould you care if he lives or dies? Or
for me, the child's mother—why should you care if I eat
my heart out with worr\?" She stood in the middle of the
kitchen, quivering, bending toward him as though she would
strangle him.
Old Sergei, a little frightened, began to make the low
humming noise between his lips that he used to make when
they were first married, to soothe her when she became ex-
cited and nervous. She had been a slim young woman then,
and he, gentle and always a little dense about the causes of
her agitation. They used, in those days, to cling together in
the dark, after a disquieting day, to the sound of that silly,
compassionate humming. It soothed her now, though she
seemed rather annoyed to be soothed. With a surrendering
quick sigh she went away into the bedroom and, after a long
period of silence there which her husband dared not inter-
rupt, returned and cooked the supper, talking only rarely,
alternately insulting him and apologizing to him.
But every day she escaped from home in pursuit of
torturing reminders of her son. Sometimes she would stand
in the gateway of the timber-yard by the river, watching the
straining bullocks pulling at logs, watching the tilted trees
on trestles being sawed by one man below and one above,
watching glistening satin logs being hauled out of the river,
£03 176 1513
watching finished planks being built into bristling wigwams.
Sometimes she walked to an orchard that tiptoed on the
slope of a hill, to see a little freak of a glimpse of very distant
Korean mountains, wedged into the jumbled puzzle of
Manchurian ups and downs. Sometimes she went to the
mission garden to watch the children of Mrs. Butters's and
to gloat over every pimple of their inferior complexions,
every missing tooth in their whining little mouths, every un-
graceful angle in their rickety limbs, every detail that flat-
tered her memory of her fine son. She was very kind to the
mission children during those days and spent a whole after-
noon mending their toy pedal motor-car. 'Tour children are
so very little, Mrs. Butters—perhaps it is healthy to be so
little, perhaps my Ser)^ozha was always too big—
I dare say
he was six inches taller than Dickie, when he was so old. It
is pity that Dickie cannot carve woods—my Seryozha did
always carve small ships in woods—but you are right—
perhaps it is dangerous to do things with knives. Your chil-
dren can play with motor-car—
this is more modem—my
Seryozha must always make something.. . . This motor-
—
car
see, it is broken—the horn cries no more, it is in two
bits—the back side has come undone from the sit-down-
upon. When my Seryozha was nine he shall have mended
this—but never mind, Dickie, I will mend it for you—
because I also have a little boy, I will glue the bulge of this
horn to his tootle—
I will glue this back side—and so
Betti and Dickie shall be as safe—
as safe—
as safe as in
."
their lovers' arms. . .
"Indeed, much safer, I hope, Mrs. Malinin," said Mrs.
Butters, frostily, drawing her children away toward the
house.
Sometimes Anna would seek out youngAlexander Weber
and make anxiously prosaic and useless suggestions about
his problem. "Well, if you love her, my dear boy, marry
her. . . . Well, if you feel like that about her, forget her.
Jffl 177 M
. . . Occupy your mind with something else. . . . Have
you tried fishing in our river? Well, dear Alexander Petro-
vitch, why not go back and ask her—ah—
you are tired of
her—well, make up your mind—
you can't have it both
ways, you know. . .
." All the time she cursed herself.
"How useless I am. Being a m.other has taught me nothing
about how to comfort a young creature's sorrow. Any other
woman would know what to say to him." Yet she heard
her own reasonable, tiresome voice again, "Well, if you still
love her, why not ask her to marry you. . .
?" Indeed, a
practical friend can always easily cut the ground from under
the feet of sorrow, but sorrow, as Anna knew, remains reared
up in the heart that harbors it; without a leg to stand on,
there it stands, as tall and terrible as ever—silly sorrow that
will not lie down—the ghost that cannot be laid—casting
its shadow where no ground is.
A day or two later, when Anna came in from mending
socks and boasting of her son at the mission, she found her
husband in great agitation, fumbling in his bureau among
his threadbare Sunday clothes.
"We must go, Annitchka, and help... a terrible thing
has happened.. . . Oi-oi! poor boy! poor boy!. . . Yet
what a wicked presumption it is to take one's ownlife. . . .
Oi-oi! what a terrible thing to happen. . .
!"
Anna gave a loud, furious cry, instantly imagining Ser-
yozha dead with a stain of blackish blood in his yellow hair.
She could not speak; she took Old Sergei by the arm with a
cruelly tight grip, and tugged him away from his occupation,
feeling impelled to prevent any one from doing anything—
to stop everything in the world happening—
if Seryozha was
dead.
"Alexander Petrovitch has killed himself. . . . Little
Mitya Nikitin came just now to ask us to go over—the boy
cut his throat. . . . Little Mitya says there was blood creep-
ing out under the door; Nikitin saw it when he got up this
fiffi 178 JJ3
morning, though they heard no sound in the night except a
sort of cooing that they thought was owls—Elyena Ivan-
ovna said, 'Owls! I never heard an owl before in Chi-tao-
kou/ And then, in the morning, blood coming under the
crack of the door in the shape of a long spoon, little Mitya
says. Of course they tried to rush in, but the door was bolted
—they had to break it open so violently that the bolt flew
across and broke the window, and Nikitin, falling inward,
nearly tumbled over the body, because it was just inside the
door. Young Weber was quite dead. Little Mitya says he
was lying with his head thrown right back and his throat
gaping, looking widely upward, as though at an airplane, his
mouth open, one hand thrown up, as though pointing, the
other holding his razor. . .
."
Anna sank down on a chair, leaning on the table. She
could hear inside her head a loud keen sound as of steam
escaping. Her first thought was: "Well, now Seryozha can-
not die—now that he has once been dead in my thoughts
and has risen again. He is safe now." She sat breathing
heavily, and gradually, as the shock passed, she forgot that
ultimate crisis of her fear and began to feel that young Web-
er's death was the most terrible thing that could have hap-
pened today. She began to remember that the day had been
mounting up in a sort of crescendo to disaster; the milk had
been sour, a chicken had been killed by a cat, by some freak
of absence of mind she had opened the wrong door in the
mission compound and found Mr. Butters at prayer with a
friend—she imagined now that she had suffered an over-
whelming sense of foreboding on hearing the mission chil-
—
dren teaching their puppy to die for its country
"Dead—
dead—Spot—dead. . .
." Anna was persuaded that the
whole day had been climbing up to death, like the note of
the rain-bird—higher and higher, sharper and sharper, crack-
ing, straining, higher and higher, till the voice splintered in
a wild horrible peal and was still.
m 179 m
Alexander Weber was now promoted in Anna's mind to
the status of a thing truly loved and terribly lost, and this
process automatically involved a paroxysm of self-reproach
on poor Anna's part; "I could have said—why didn't I in-
sist?—if I had been wiser—
I might have said—
I might
have done . .
/' and now there he was, his blood running
like a messenger out into the world, with a message of tacit
reproach to a world full of blunderers.
Anna noticed that her husband had found and put on his
old only Homburg hat. This hat, which Old Sergei scarcely
ever wore, was his tribute to the solemnity and excitement
of death. Like the screw top of an engine out of regular use
and seldom assembled, it lidded a creaking, rusty organism,
rarely set in motion but nowprofoundly pulsing and pound-
ing, the reawakened essence of vitality running like a vapor
from end to end of the feeble obsolete casing that in-
closed it.
"Where are you going?" asked Anna, huskily. '1 think
you sit here and wait for disasters."
"Well, we ought both to go and help, I think. The boy
was of our race. Besides, he left a letter for you. Elyena Ivan-
ovna has it."
He clung with both hands to her arm as she led him
through the streets. His body hung back, for fear of stum-
bling, but his spirit urged haste for fear of missing some-
thing. He was always in a hurry to be near the dead, for-
getting that the dead are the only friends who can be really
depended on to wait for us.
The Nikitin tribe, a group of promoted peasants—three
or four inter-related families living in a maze of Korean
houses that almost amounted to a hamlet—
was divided
between sentimentality and resentment, in the matter of
Alexander Weber's suicide. They had laid the body of the
young man, as though it were in disgrace yet might hope to
be forgiven, in a room in an outlying house. The grand-
fd ISO jjiji
mother of the various famiHes, a very aged, crumpled, ivory
creature, watched over the body, trimmed the candles, and
read—
or seemed to read—from the Bible, though much
of what she mumbled was a half-remembered rigmarole,
for she never had been able to read easily and was, in any
case, almost blind now.
Alexander Weberlay on the bed, looking astounded. The
bluish lids now covering his large, sunken, meditative eyes
did not modify his expression of amazement. His lips were
set in a tautness that was not so much a smile as a sugges-
tion of an attempt to whistle through his teeth. 'Tm not
listening to you," that mouth seemed to say, provocatively.
'Tou can say what you like—
you can't annoy me now. Fm
simply not listening." His neck was rigidly bandaged with
clean cloths, and this gave him a stiff, stuffed, shrugging
look, like a skeleton George the Fourth. After so much talk
of blood, it seemed to Anna that everything looked very
wan—
very thoroughly drained of color. The white band-
ages, the white clothes on the young man's bleached body,
the pale light of the candles competing with the cracks of
denied daylight, the scrubbed boards, the wilderness of
sheet, the quietness, the featureless old voice mumbling—
everything seemed pale, stilled, and suspended.
Anna had snatched up, as she left her own home, a little
silver cross that had been left to her by an old aunt long ago.
It had little sentimental meaning for her, but she had so
few possessions that, if she had thought a little longer, she
would perhaps have found that she could not spare it. Now,
however, it was in her hand; she had looked at it several
times, on her way through the streets, not committing her-
self to sacrificing it, yet dedicating it to sacrifice . . . teach-
ing her hand to give it away. And now, without saying any-
thing, she laid it on Alexander's breast above his clasped
finger tips. "Easy to do—now," she thought, self-reproach-
fully. "Everything I do is always easy and obvious by the
fiJJ 181 flJJ
time it occurs to me to do it/' But she was glad that she had
laid her cross on his breast. That was the right, womanly
thing to do, at last. She heard one of the Nikitin nieces mak-
ing a httle clucking sound of approval beside her, and was
soberly relieved to have made no mistake in giving her gift.
The cross made a little shining, definite meaning to the
blank picture; it slipped into place as the moon slips into a
blind evening sky, when the sunset has been drained away.
Old Sergei stood at the room door, hungrily craning his
face toward the dead youth. "Shut away/' murmured Old
Sergei, hoarse with the excitement that death always aroused
in him. "Cut off—shut away. How curious it all is! . . .
All the little things lost—his tastes in food, the jokes that
amused him—how curious! Even perhaps a little plan that
he had to buy himself a blue tie in Harbin or to see Charlie
Chaplin in the cinema—
all lost—nothing could be more
lost; if you offered a reward of a million rubles, you could
never know those things now. How curious/ Perhaps there
was something his whole heart was set on, yesterday—and
yet, if it happened today, he wouldn't turn his head to
look."
"No," said Anna. "If she came now, he wouldn't turn
his head to look."
"How curious—how curious—how very curious," whis-
pered Old Sergei, trembling with elemental bewilderment,
"that he should make no sound. If he had left this room
a thousand years ago, the room couldn't have lost his voice
more completely. I haven't seen a dead man since I was
blind, you know, Annitchka, and I had forgotten that dead
men don't breathe. Come away—come away now, An-
nitchka. I can't bear to hear no breathing. It's so very
curious. Where is that breath? Where are the words we
should have heard from him today? Oi! how terrible not to
see a thing so silent! Death is more explained by eyes than
by ears, Annitchka. Listen—
I simply couldn't touch a
£lI3 182 152J
dead man, now that I can't see. It would be like . . . cold
meat. . .
."
"There is no need to touch him/' said Anna, indifferently.
She did not move, and Old Sergei, clutching her arm,
leaned forward, listening to the stillness that frightened
him, glaring with his useless eyes. They stood for a long
time, as though in a dream. Anna had strayed into a mood
of peace. She almost didn't care, now. Here was one un-
happy boy's unhappiness quieted, and her own happy boy
left alive to enjoy his strong, hopeful life—undisturbed by
such a destructive thing as the love of women. God was
not dead. If the two boys had changed places—the happy
one cut off in his happiness, the despairing one preserved in
his despair—she would have thought, 'This is typical of
the contrariness—the non-sense of divine decrees." Often
Anna felt obliged to suspect the divine wisdom, but now
she gladly admitted a kind of profound sense
—
even in
omniscience. That blood-sucking woman—whatever her
name was—had missed one splendid and indispensable vic-
tim, and drained this poor drooping boy of his life. Seryo-
zha was the more valuable, and he was safe. For Seryozha,
thought Anna, a mother and a dog were enough. Neither
she nor any other boy's mother would ever find Seryozha
sitting on a stone, glaring as if in a trance at a swift river,
talking—talking of a cruel woman, as though his tongue
had forgotten all other words, as though his thoughts'
grooves were worn too deep for change, as though his heart
were bound to a ghost—like a story she had read some-
where about a prisoner bound to a corpse. Well, something
like justice had been done. Seryozha was safe from love,
and this desperate boy at peace at last—dead of that same
love.
Now, now no longer sealed
In a thin pent body,
Mine are the windy fields
And the long halls of the wood;
I, who was loved and held,
Am now as cold as God.
The lover and his bride
Burn in a nanow flame.
We who have died
Keep no such tnst with worms.
Our sleep is wide,
Being in no man's arms.
One of the women of the house touched Anna's arm and
gave her a letter. Anna's name was written on a rather
bulging envelope.
The letter said, in rather a stilted manner,
Esteemed Anna Semionovna,I have decided to finish a life
which is no more interesting to me. I am twenty-four years
old and I am convinced that life has nothing more to offer me.
I have alwa}-s held the philosophical opinion that a man of
experience has a perfect right to take his own life when, in his
mature opinion, he has had his fill of experience. I don't know
whether I may have mentioned to you that I have been very
badly treated by a woman (if woman she can be called), by
name Tatiana Pavlovna Ostapenko, and you may perhaps think
that I have been w^eak enough to let her heartless behavior
prey upon my mind, and that this is the cause of my death. It
is not so, I assure you. Her repudiation of my honorable affec-
tion, though unreasonable, could not, of course, affect very
seriously a man of my philosophical temperament. On the con-
trar}% I am glad to think that my death will relie\-e her of re-
morse for her conduct—for she has a tender conscience, though
she has no heart. She will think, "W'ell, poor Sasha is safely
dead, now. I need worr\- about his sorrows no more." For she
did worr\-—with a cold uneasiness. Perhaps when she is a lonely
m 184 m
old woman she will worry again, but for the present she is wel-
come to get what satisfaction she can out of my death. In
reahty, myHfe and mydeath are my own affair, and women have
had no irffluence on either. I should like to leave her my little
gold compass which I have wrapped in a sealed packet in my
pack, though it may seem ironical that I should leave her the
thing I valued most in life, since she valued me not at all. Nor I
her very much, really. I leave to my mother Maria Nicholaievna
Weber, my money, seventeen yen fifty, and the rest of my pos-
sessions. Except mywatch, which I leave to myyounger brother,
Konstantin Petrovitch Weber, with the advice that when he
grows up he confine his love affairs to the caresses of Korean
singing girls—they are safer than the kindness of virtuous
women.
I should be grateful, Anna Semionovna, if you would kindly
send the inclosed letter to my mother, as above, at 2 Take-
zoecho Ichome, Seoul, and apportion the belongings found on
my person and in my pack as above directed. I hope you realize
that I did appreciate your kindness to me, thoughI may have
seemed at the time rather absent-minded, owing to some busi-
ness affairs that were engrossing me. In reality I enjoyed the
various amusing and interesting chats we had together.
Alexander Weber
"Well," thought Anna, biting her lips defiantly as she
read this letter. "It couldn't have been my Seryozha. It
couJdnt. It's ridiculous to compare the two boys. One was
half a man and the other is a whole boy. No woman could
suck the blood out of my Seryozha, especially a woman
whom all her lovers call death. Besides, he is most unlikely
to meet her—twelve hours out of his way. Whyshould he
meet her? There must be hundreds of Russians in Korea?"
She looked at Alexander's stiff suspense-filled face, and some
inward dismissing finger in her heart pointed him away—
away—
to be hurried into the earth—
to be buried v/ith
ffll 185 M
his dangerous secret of love—
to have that mouth stopped
that talked so constantly of his cruel love—
to have that
wound of love cauterized—
to isolate a contagious heart in
the cleansing grave.
But as she walked home, with Old Sergei clinging to her
arm, tears ran down her face and she sobbed aloud. "Oi! it's
just that all boys are alike/' she said, roughly and brokenly
to her husband. "The same number of fingers and toes . . .
the same silly hearts . . . the same busy soft bodies . . .
all the boys in the world are really like one huge silly young
body.. . . Yet Seryozha's still safe. I can't care much.about
this poor Alexander." As for Alexander—
let some other
mother worry about him. She, Anna, had given him her
aunt's silver cross
—and so
—
away with him!
"We must help the Nikitins to arrange for a decent
funeral, even though he did kill himself," said Old Sergei,
fussily. "There was a nice plot of ground next to Alexei
Vassileievitch's grave, wasn't there? Shall you leave your
aunt's silver cross on his breast, or did you only lend it to
him?"
"My aunt's cross? How do you know I put my aunt's
silver cross on his breast? You did not go near him."
"How do I know? How should I not know? I saw it, of
course." He was abruptly silent for an astonished moment
and then said, "Anna—
I saw it."
Anna's thoughts always ran in such a bustling hurry along
grooves worn by her own experience that for a moment she
did not realize the significance of his emphasis—in spite of
her first feeling of disconnection between the remark and
her reason. He saw it
—
well, why was that nonsense? She
had seen it herself. Why not? He saw it, yes—he saw it?
He—
saw it? But he was blind!
"How could you have seen it?" she said, irascibly. "How
could you see anything? Tell me, how did you really know
it was there? You didn't touch him—
you said you couldn't
1513 186 fflj
bear to and you didn't. What do you mean, you silly old
man? How did you know about the cross? Explain. Don't
make silly mysteries."
'There is no mystery. I saw it/' said Old Sergei. Then the
impression began to dim and he added: 'Tet, no—that's
absurd. How could I have seen it? Let me see
—how did I
know it was there?"
Anna's mind could only digest everythings or nothings.
There was no sometimes in her schedule, only ctlways and
nevei. Tlie suicide of Alexander, and her own sense of fail-
ure, had inspired in her that futile, sore irritation left by a
happening that cannot be revoked—that craving of the
heart to say, "Let's pretend it hasn't happened," when the
brain answers, "But it has. . ,
." The heart crying, "Come
back to yesterday—yesterday he lived," and the brain in-
sisting, "No. Face today. Today he is dead. . .
."
"Oh, you old nuisance!" said Anna, while even as she
spoke she recognized her accusation as false and unfair. "I
believe you can see all the time. You have been pretending
blindness all these months, just to be tiresome and make us
pity you.. . . Look, walk by yourself now, you old hypo-
crite. You can see perfectly well. Let go of my arm." She
threw his clinging hands away from her arm and walked
furiously away.
Old Sergei was left in the middle of the street, flapping
his arms like a child. He threw all his tremulous house-
holder's dignity away and began bellowing: "Anna! Anna!
Help! Anna, are you a devil? Annitchka, I am lost—
I can't
see. Annitchka darling, help me! . .
." Several Chinese ped-
dlers, shocked and amused at this loud scene between a male
and female Big-nose, stood still to watch.
Anna came back to him and snatched at his hand, almost
crying with hatred of herself and him: "Tschah! Comealong
then; come along, you old fool."
"But, Anna, I swear you are wrong," twittered the old
man, wild with relief at her return, clinging with both hands
to her wrist as he stumbled beside her. "Annitchka, I swear
I am no hypocrite—
I am blind—
you can see Vm blind.
The doctor said I was blind. I can't explain about the silver
cross, but I am not lying about my blindness—
I swear it
—Anna—believe it
—believe it—believe it!" he cried,
shrilly. Her harshness had sent him abruptly back into his
childhood again, he shook and pinched her arm, like a
naughty child, in a panic of insistence. The Chinese ped-
dlers walked slowly behind them, laughing, fascinated and
embarrassed.
'1 shall go straight to the hospital," said Anna, obsti-
nately, 'and talk to the Japanese doctor and ask him what
really is wrong with your sight. . . whether it is possible
that you are simply pretending, all these months, to be help-
less. He called it hystencal from the first. ... I shall ask
him what all this means—
—
—
—
I see
I can't see
I see
I
can't see. Tschah! you old baby.. .
."
And she did, after leaving him on his own threshold, walk
to the hospital, having nothing else to do, and ask the Japa-
nese doctor to explain this curious intermission in her hus-
band's blindness—
if genuine blindness it was.
TheJapanese doctor was a very sparkling young man who
had studied medicine and psychology in Chicago. In spite
of his American education, he still presented that contradic-
tion or quibble in social convention characteristic of his race,
which obliged him continually to hiss inward politely
through his teeth for fear of seeming to exhale in the pres-
ence of a stranger, yet allowed him to hawk and cough ex-
plosively every minute into that stranger's very eye.
He thought poor fat untidy Anna very uncouth, but he
bowed to her neatly and repeatedly and was delighted to talk
about his most treasured case
—Old Sergei. He was less de-
lighted to hear about him, for, though he spoke beautiful
English, he understood very little, unless it was written
£|J3 188 fiJl
down. This is a peculiarity of the Japanese as linguists—
all
have tongues, but few have ears. A Japanese fellow traveler
maygive you an exhaustive account of the geological history
of the Cheddar Gorge, and yet face you with a blank baffled
bow when you ask him to pass the cheese, please.
'Tou say he saw something—
a horse, I understand."
"A cross on a dead man's breast."
"Ah, you say he is dead. Well"
"No. Hehas seen a cross that I have given to a dead man."
"Ah, he has seen a dead man. I see by my notes that this
interest in funerals is characteristic of the patient. I under-
stand everything now. This glimpse of a dead man is most
illuminating, missis." Even while he was speaking he de-
cided to write an account of Old Sergei's case to the maga-
zine of the medical school at which he had studied. He saw
Anna through a sort of veil of anticipated printed words of
flattery.. . . "Doctor K. Morimoto of the Chi-tao-kou hos-
pital, Kanto. . . . Interesting observations by Japanese psy-
chologist.. . . Notes of an illuminating case. . . . Doctor
K. Morimoto's newlight on hysterical amblyopia.. . . Doc-
tor K. Morimoto, the rising young psycho-pathologist.. .
."
Tlie doctor felt obliged to speak loudly to Anna through this
happy fog of hopes and compliments which dazzled his gold-
rimmed glasses, she seemed to him so pleasantly dimmed.
Yet he bowed automatically in her direction, feeling vaguely
grateful to her for having an illuminating husband. "This
matter bears out myfirst diagnosis, thus proving it to be per-
fectly correct. Your husband could, I am convinced, be
cured of his pseudo blindness by psycho-analysis, if Chi-tao-
kou could produce an analyst who shared some common
language with the patient. Nothing, however, could be less
helpful than the analysis in Japanese of a Russian patient
who had no acquaintance with the Japanese language by an
analyst who was unable to speak Russian. Your husband,
m 189 m
when attacked by business and other misfortunes, and find-
ing his position as independent merchant and paterfamihas
threatened by the pohce and other dangers, takes refuge,
unconsciously, in a reversion to the helplessness of the child,
a claim for protection in this case established by blindness.
Hysteria, you must remember, missis, is an affliction like any
other affliction; it must not excite our contempt or irrita-
tion; it must be treated as a real affliction. Your husband is
certainly not consciously deceiving us all; his Unconscious is
simply tired of the responsibility of being the head of a
family in such difficult circumstances, and, by wrapping it-
self in such a disability as blindness, claims the protection,
so to speak, of his family—
a protection that cannot be
withheld from a blind man. I see, by referring to mynotes,
that your husband has long had an interest—amounting al-
most to an obsession—about the duty of honoring the dead
of his own race. So, being brought into the presence—
I
think you said—of a dead Russian today, his Unconscious
allowed itself—
if I may so speak—
a little holiday from its
protective business of blindness, and gave him a glimpse—
which he did not at once realize was a glimpse—of what so
profoundly interested him. This craving to see the dead man
being satisfied, the protective armor of pseudo blindness is
resumed."
*'The old liar/' blurted Anna.
The doctor's Unconscious wrapped itself in a protective
armor of impenetrable Japaneseness. 'Tes indeed, missis.
You must simply consider your husband for the present as
a genuinely blind man, though his physical sight is unim-
paired. His Unconscious is determined not to see until it is
safe for it to do so, as it were. It will not allow him to be
thrust back into the ranks of well and hearty men who take
charge of their own affairs."
'The old coward," snorted Anna.
m 190 M
"Indeed yes, a most interesting case/' mused the doctor.
"It only needs to be rounded off by a cure/'
'It certainly does/' said Anna, ominously.
But on the way home she resolved to be more patient
with her old coward. She heard with horror in her remem-
bering ears her own rough harsh voice and his gentle
martyred bleatings. "Did ever any woman commit so many
sins as I?" she exclaimed, secretly, stamping and snorting
along the street. "Never a minute passes without myhaving
to be sorry for something I did the last minute. I must have
been mad to treat my Old Sergei so
—
even if he had
been the worst old husband in the world. And he's not the
worst—he's only just an old fool—and he's fond of me."
But her conscience could not let even this description of
him stand. She began tenderly to remember him as he was
when she married him—
a thin, fanciful, conscientious
bookkeeper in a Russian firm in London, a member of a
high-thinking debating society, and interested in moths. He
was always rather like a moth himself, she thought, but a
nice, ivory-colored, clean one. He had been devoted to his
gay, noisy Anna. He had always been ready to cover up her
mistakes and comfort her conscience. She had married him
—(Good God! was it possible?)—she had married him
because she thought he was so wise. But the fact that he
had proved not to be wise seemed to her now endearing. If
he had been really wise he would not have remained de-
voted, she thought with a humble hiccough, to a fat blun-
derer like herself.
And so she went on thinking in remorseful circles until
she got home, and then she heard her own voice saying, "I
went to see the doctor and he says your blindness is all
hysterical lies—
all lies—do you hear? You needn't trouble
to lie to me any more, now that I know. Ah, tschah! I
brought you a packet of English cigarettes to smoke, you
m 191 m
old liar . . . !" And she threw the packet rudely on the floor
at his feet. Old Sergei humbly crouched to grope for it, but
Anna squatted down herself to pick it up. Their foreheads
collided. "Devil take you, you old fool/' said Anna, and she
helped him into a standing position and patted him, a little
too hard, on the back, uncertain whether she did it in exas-
peration or friendliness.
In this precarious way the days went on, piled themselves
heavily together to make a week—
a fortnight. When Old
Sergei had ten knots in his string, he began to say, reason-
ably, "He really might be back today; it isn't likely, but he
might"
At the end of a fortnight they received a letter from
Seryozha to say that he had married Tatiana Pavlovna
Ostapenko.
It was a very bald letter. Seryozha was not a literary boy.
Anna found it when she came in from a long walk out into
the country—out on to the road by which she hoped to see,
far across the valley, two distant figures returning home.
"He has married that woman whom Alexander Weber
called death," said Anna, putting down the letter. Now she
knew why the outlines of young Alexander's body had
seemed so empty and expectant to her. Seryozha had been
drawn away, like life through the door of a wound, drawn
across deserts to love death, drawn by the lure of a ghost—
a cruel ghost who sucked life. That was the end of Anna's
son. He had been stolen away, to lie at last dead, far from
home, married to death. That blank that was Alexander
had been waiting—
to be filled by Seryozha's glowing body.
Anna's eyes, unprompted by her sense, now filled in a him
in the place of the it that had lain on Nikitin's table—that
pale death—that wan vision—that thing only casually
labeled Alexander Petrovitch, as it might have been labeled
with a number—that obscurely anonymous seventh
m 192 flffl
doomed lover of a ghost. Anna knew now what dear color
that pallor waited for—the bright dead face of Ser^^ozha
—astounded, desolate, haloed with white, alone, and mar-
ried to death.
"My son is dead. Now I care for nothing—my son—
since I have let you go—the light of my eyes.. .
."
•
/M m
flY«Y*Y«1 I •! •! •!
m/m/MmmA
•TfT*T«T*T«T T»T«TtT«T«
sm/
CHAPTER TEN
The night of the goose and champagne—the night of
Seryozha's arrival at the Ostapenkos' house—seemed the
longest night in the whole realm of time—
a sort of Me-
thuselah of a night. The days of a man's life, thought Ser-
yozha, are of different ranks—counts, princes, fat bourgeois
days, rough peasant days—but this was a grand, duke of a
day, a giant of rank, quite outside the standard of ordinary
days. Each royal minute was like an hour, each hour like a
crowned year. All the other days of his life should bow be-
fore this—the day that promoted him to be a king, to be
married, to drink champagne.
Wilfred's great day, which, for some little time, may be
said to have been in echpse, rose again when the goose was
served. Wilfred, on being tactfully roused by Seryozha and
led away to put his head under the pump, assumed a guiltily
bright manner, to prove to the world, and to the absent
Reverend Oswald Fawcett (who was Wilfred's conscience)
that he had not drunk any wine to speak of. He did not
notice that his legal document had disappeared from in
front of him; he hardly remembered having written it,
though it remained a settled plan in his mind; his tongue
m 194 m
felt a little knotted and uncertain, but that did not matter,
since scarcely any one would have understood anything he
said in any case. He enjoyed the goose.
Varvara's goose took three and a half hours to eat. It was
half past eleven when they finally could eat no more, and
even then there was no childish suggestion of going to bed.
The day was recognized by common consent as a great day,
and allowed to occupy its throne indefinitely. It scarcely
seemed to the happy and excited Seryozha to move at all.
Half past eleven when the goose was finished and, hours
later, only twenty-eight minutes to twelve. The time that
had elapsed since his proposal to marry Tatiana had been
accepted seemed so enormous that he was as well reconciled
to it as though his parents had arranged it in his childhood.
Age had matured and mellowed it to the status of a reason-
able sanctioned thing.
He found Tanya more and more beautiful each minute,
and each long minute gave him time to learn something
new and dehghtful about her face. At first it embarrassed
him to look at her across the brown hill of goose carcass that
stood between them, because she, on her part, never took
her eyes off his face. But after a while he found that some-
how, though her eyes were on him, their two pairs of eyes
never seemed to meet. She seemed to be looking at him in a
blind way, as a painted picture looks, and he could watch
her without self-consciousness, as one might bravely cross
glances with a painted queen. Seryozha had never in his life
had such an opportunity to look at a beautiful girl. He had
no words to say all the things he noted about her. "Supple,'*
he thought, anxiously, "clean—
even—ivory—bones like
carved curves
—hollows under cheek-bones, carved again—
something pulling outer corners of eyes down and lips up
—
accurate—keen—
sun always dazzling eyes.. .
." He
saw that her skin was like faintly tinted ivory, but, never
having approached real civilization, was not surprised at that
m 195 m
pale gloss that would have showed you or me that Tatiana
had never come in contact with a powder puff.
As for Tatiana, she had never seen that odd animal, man,
presented in such fair colors and with such striking inoffen-
siveness of detail. I dare say that the fact that Seryozha had
never yet needed to shave (though he did shave, sometimes,
on Sundays, when his mother was unusually forgetful of his
manliness) had, at the beginning, more part in his fascina-
tion for her than any other factor. He seemed to her so well
sewn up in his nice skin. Men, she had always found, were
such a clumsy piece of work compared with animals. They
were so flawed, so pitted with pores and discolorations, so
smoky, so hot, so shiny bald or sticky-haired—like a child's
stitching on canvas, whereas any animal was like Chinese
embroidery on silk. One had only to compare the face of a
Korean beggar dog—crawling with ticks, yet honest, fin-
ished, and sinless—with that of a Korean beggar man—
rotted awaywith mean andcomplex depravity. . . one had
only to compare the fine eager beam of a thirsty horse bend-
ing to drink from a pool, with the leer of a Russian ap-
proaching his glass of beer—
to see the essential golden
Tightness in an animal's face and to admit the spoiled
spotted thing that man is. Seryozha seemed to Tatiana as
flawless and bland as an animal, and she watched him with
real delight and imagination, as she often watched her
father's young horses running from end to end of their field.
Life beamed from Seryozha direct—not refracted among
distorting human angles. Whatever he did would be light,
Tatiana thought, just as whatever an animal does is right.
Sometimes dangerous, perhaps, sometimes surprising—but
always right. And always lovely, if one looked at it not
through the complicated spoiled lens of human eyes. Some-
thing about an animal was always mercifully far away—by
itself, even if the animal was in one's arms, demanding at-
tention. Something about man was too close, even if that
m 196 m
manwas far away, even if he was dead in a far country, dead
of his own intrusion. Something about Seryozha would al-
ways be far away, thought Tatiana, even if his breath were
on one's cheek—something in him would be part of the
sunny, sweet, dumb world, happy and living by itself, like a
galloping colt.
Pavel Ostapenko's voice trumpeted on. Hardly a word he
said was true, but every word exalted him or his family. He
was like a motor engine which, by running, charges continu-
ally its own battery. Tlie more his lips uttered his own
praises, the more was his listening heart charged with an ex-
quisite accumulation of vanity, and the more self-flatteries
did his lips find to express. Seryozha was by now quite estab-
lished as a grafted twig upon the towering Ostapenko tree.
Tlie divine word Ostapenko now included Seryozha and his
parents, and the whole great branching growth brushed the
clouds.
Neither Seryozha nor Wilfred drank any more wine. This
was partly because Pavel Ostapenko had by now drunk so
much that he continually forgot to fill any glass but his own.
But it was also because Seryozha was warm with a glow of
glittering responsibility; he did not want to lose himself in
folly and sickness tonight; he was gloriously happy as he
was, and everything looked as happy as a flower. He felt that
he had climbed to a pinhead peak of happiness, and that to
go any farther would be as stupid a descent as to retreat—
and almost as impossible. As for Wilfred Chew, the spirit
of the Reverend Oswald Fawcett was reestablished on his
disciple's inward throne. Wilfred felt sure that he had not
yet done anything wrong. Surely a good Wesleyan could
join in the harmless feastings of his friends—especially if
the language bar prevented any other sociable interchange.
Champagne up till nowhad been labeled Good Fellowship.
But the happy emergency of Good Fellowship being over.
m 197 m
the liquid part of the feasting nowbecame alcohol and even
moral danger. Wilfred, really anxious to be good, was made
aware of the necessity for this change of labels, by noticing
that he was talking, involuntarily, in a rather peculiar way.
Every time he finished a sentence he clicked in his throat
and resolved prudently to say no more. Then, the next min-
ute, that hard-worked and usually impeccable servant, his
tongue, wouldstart unexpectedly on a newpiece of strangely
twisted and thwarted information.
Varvara Ostapenko sat divided between a resentful con-
viction that her husband was drunk, and a resentful fear that
the strangers might have the impertinence to notice that he
was drunk. There were drawbacks in being married to such
a rare creature as her husband, she thought, and one of the
drawbacks was the commonness of the people who dared to
pass their common secret judgments on his rarity. Drunken-
ness was an Ostapenko oddity that she allowed for in the
Procrustes frame of her wifely pride, but every time her hus-
band got drunk he got drunk in a slightly different way, and
she had to use her ingenuity to lop off something here about
his behavior, and stretch something there, to fit her angular,
inelastic standard of Ostapenkoism. She felt the necessity of
presenting to strangers the sight of each Ostapenko neatly
fitted into this frame—"and criticize anything if you dare!"
Pavel's romantic lies were part of her standard for him; his
arrogance, his belching, his forgetfulness of his guests' needs,
his occasional rancorous references to his daughter—were
excrescences that needed shaping into conformity, and at
every example of these unlicensed eccentricities, Varvara
looked furiously at Seryozha and Wilfred to see if they had
dared to see or hear.
But Seryozha stared only at Tatiana, and Wilfred was
listening only for loopholes in the talk into which he might
squeeze some uncomprehended remark of his own. So pres-
ffl 198 m
ently Varvara felt that she could trust her rare drunk Pavel
alone with these gentle strangers and go to bed. She took
Tatiana's hand to lead her away.
The mutual stare of Tatiana and Seryozha had, it seemed
to them, blown a sort of thin glass globe inclosing them—
a glittering loneliness in which a miracle of dumb familiarity
had been possible. All round it the humming sound of
Pavers talk had only served to make their apartness more
private. Ser}ozha was even able to leave enough of his un-
needed brain outside this cr\^stal bubble to allow him to
answer with a suitable grunt the tone of any of PaveFs re-
marks that sounded incomplete without a complementary
guestly grunt. But all the time he and Tatiana felt as deeply
sunk in themselves and in each other as puppies must feel
in one litter in the straw while the bustle of the stable goes
on above them. And now, by Varvara's action in rising and
taking Tatiana's hand, their glass house was shattered, their
mindless drowsy warmth of shared life was startled into a
tiresome awareness.
The women were gone. The royal day had doffed its
crown.
Pavel Ostapenko's talk now imposed the tiresome neces-
sity of being understood. There was now nothing for Ser-
yozha to bury his attention in, except his host's voice—
nothing to watch except those staring, rufous eyes, that little
gold-red beard being pulled and pushed like a latch to open
and shut busy jaws, the blouse flapping open to show drops
of sweat among the thick auburn hairs on his breast.
Directly Varvara and Tatiana had gone, Pavel, also notic-
ing their absence, responded to it by talking about his wife.
"A wonderful woman—my wife—Varvara Alexeievna,"
he said. "I wish I could be sure that our girl would makeyou
as good a wife as her mother has me. Lord! how sorry I feel
for some of my friends with their scolding wives—wives
who set themselves up to be their equals—wives who gad
m 199 m
about in silk stockings—wives who get drunk—wives who
can't even roast a chicken decently. You know, there was
quite a romance about my marriage with Varvara Alex-
eievna. . . . She was a milkman's daughter, and of course
my people wouldn't hear of such a match for me. We
Ostapenkos are intensely proud—but also, mark you, in-
tensely romantic—chivalrous—disinterested. If one of my
family gives his word, well, he'll keep it as though it were a
lawyer's bond. Well, that's what my father hadn't reckoned
with—he wasn't allowing for the romantic chivalry I in-
herited from him and the impulsive, passionate, quixotic
line behind him. I won't conceal from you that my father
had reason on his side; I could have made a most excellent
marriage with the daughter of one of my father's oldest
friends—
a fine plump girl with a big dowry and broad hips
and shoulders, who loved me to distraction and would no
doubt have borne me half a dozen sons to carry on my
name, instead of one puny hen-chick. It would have been a
good match, and I won't say that I was blind to its ad-
vantages—but, 'No,' I said—
'no, papa, I can't go back on
my word'"
'Translate to our host, Saggay Saggayitch," Wilfred sud-
denly said, speaking very carefully, "how much I admire his
taste in fuming—in fursh—in furnaces—in furnishing
what is usually such a comfortless place—
a Japanese house.
It is almost English, almost 'sgood as the first-class boarding-
house where I stayed in Bloomsbury West Central One,
while a law student. Such strong chegs to the lairs, and all
so costly as I can see with half an egg—half an eye."
"
'Poor little Varvara Alexeievna loves me, papa,' I said,
'and counts on me. I've given her my word and I'll marry
her like an honorable man.' Well, there was a terrible pas-
sionate scene—typical of the scenes in our family, for we
were no milk-and-water lot, I assure you, when roused. But
in the eiid my father saw I was determined—
a twinkle
m 200 ffl
came into his eye and he said, 'By God! Pavhk, you're a true
Ostapenko, no doubt about that'
"And tell him, too," added Wilfred, "that even in Eng-
land I never saw before a mustard-pot in the shape of a
howl—owl—though I once saw this bird in person when
going to Ascot in a flus, buttering through the woods one
evening. Fluttering—through—
a wood—in-a-bus."
"I married Varya, as you might say, if not exactly out of
pity, certainly out of chivalry—
poor soul. I knew she was
not likely to have any other offers—
a poor milkman's
daughter, and so thin, and with that birthmark. But Lord,
she was—and still is
—devoted to me. Sheknows her luck."
Pavel's face was the face of a man who had never had a
setback. His features were set in lines of happy certainty;
his mouth looked entirely brave against self-doubt; his
tongue did not know howto stumble. Onlyhis eyes, anxious
and roundly staring, looked as if they feared attack—
as if
he had to open them widely in order to collect evidence that
all that he said was believed and appreciated. His eyes chal-
lenged you to say that he lied or was mistaken in anything,
and if you had expressed a doubt, he would have piled evi-
dence on evidence, false witness on false witness, lie upon
lie, perjured oath upon oath, completely forgetting the
foundation of truth on which such a toppling edifice of af-
firmation is most safely built. Until at last you had to admit,
"Well—yes—
if you assure me of that, and that, and that,
and swear to it so solemnly, of course I must believe you that
this is so," and only then did his round eyes relax, blink,
look safe again. You were convinced; that was all that mat-
tered; he had obliged you to admit that he was right.
Whether he was right did not matter—that he had lied
from the beginning did not matter—
you had said that he
was right, you accepted his truth, though it was no truth.
"I must say," went on Pavel, "except in one matter, Fve
never had to regret my impulsive and chivalrous decision.
JJJl 201 SU
Varya's been a wonderful wife to me (I can see it nowlook-
ing back) except in one particular. The exception I leave
you to imagine, my dear boy. You're young, but you know
life, and you know as well as I do there are certain things a
decent man doesn't give away when talking of his wife.
Nature—and a man's nature especially, mindyou—shocks
her, seems to her improper. She has tried to adapt herself,
poor soul; she sees quite well that such freakishness and
prudishness make a woman an unworthy mate for a manly
man. But fundamentally, it's still there. ... It accounts for
much of the oddity in our Tanya's nature. Tanya, our only
child, has inherited her mother's nature, though her cold-
ness has a different aspect.. . . Tanya doesn't think any-
thing improper—indeed, her mother and I have often had
to check the freedom with which she describes her obsen^a-
tions of animals. She doesn't examine realities enough to be
shocked by them—she just feels far away from physical
realities. She is, you see, of an unhuman nature. (I'm not
concealing anything from you, my boy, I don't think it
)
would be fair.
He fixed his round eyes on Seryozha all the time, as if, in
spite of the complacent set of his mouth and carriage of his
head, he was expecting Seryozha to say: "O Lord! Pavel
Nicholaievitch, you are a liar!" But of course Seryozha said
nothing of the sort. He sat in a dream, half listening to his
host, half remembering the lost face of Tatiana. He rubbed
the bridge of his broad shiny nose wisely. Of course he knew
that parents never know anything about their children.
"Saggay Saggayitch," said Wilfred, "you say nothing. As
a friend you will 'llow me to suggest, would it not be better
to show a little more vivivacity with this kind gentleman,
Mr. Ozz. You don't talk enough, my dear chap, you don't
make the bezz of yourself. Your future mayhang on making
bezz of self."
"When I say unhuman," went on Pavel, "I don't mean
fiffl 202 M
anything against the child's temper. She has the sweetest
temper, the tenderest heart. . . . She gets her sweetness of
nature from my side, of course. She's a dear girl and per-
haps love will teach her a great deal. I used to call her a fairy
when she was little, and now sometimes Fmtempted to call
her a fairy still, but Yd say it in a different voice now. It's
been a great pain to me. I counted so on a family of robust
sons and daughters to hand on my good old name to. . . .
They're a man's immortality, his children and his children's
children. . . . However, my dear boy, it may very well be
that the right husband for Tanya may get the right results
with her. One never can tell. Even icebergs melt under some
sun or other, and Tanya, as I say, isn't an iceberg emo-
tionally. . . she has myblood in her as well as her mother's,
and therefore she has her own brand of passionate feelings,
like all her breed. She signed that paper with a very good
grace—allowing for the natural shrinking of a young girl
—and in a sense she is already your wife, with her own
eager consent, mark you, which is further than any of the
other lads ever got. That paper was drawn up by a profes-
sional lawyer, and declares you man and wife. You couldn't
ask for a better paper than that." He was silent suddenly,
pouring himself out some more wine.
Nobody spoke for several minutes, not even Wilfred. Wil-
fred's head was nodding; his eyelids and chin were dropping.
The clock pointed to half past twelve and Seryozha was
proud to find that he was not sleepy.
Pavel began speaking again in a voice of rather defiant
surprise. "J^^t now I said 'In a sense Tanya is your legal
wife.' But of course really there's no in a sense about it. She
is your wife. That document was drawn up by a professional
lawyer; we have all signed it in the presence of Varya and
Katya as witnesses. What more could we do to make a mar-
riage legal? There is no priest of our Church available—be-
sides, you and I are too modern to feel the need of the
m 203 m
Church's interference in practical matters hke this. In Paris
—London—NewYork—
a legal paper, duly drawn up and
signed, is enough for a legal marriage. Why should we ex-
pect more in Mi-san? Myboy, you're a married man. Con-
gratulations!" Doubt came into his strained eyes again.
*
'Really I don't know what else one could want to make the
thing correct and in order—lacking a priest. It's not as if
there was any unwillingness on either side—
you both
signed of your own free will, at your own suggestion. She
gets a good dowry. You'll find me a generous father-in-law.
All we Ostapenkos are generous to a fault. Your father,
Sergei Dmitrivitch, will be delighted at such a good match
for you—
a dowry of two thousand yen is not to be sniffed
at, and there'll be more later—and he gets a lovely daugh-
ter-in-law into the bargain."
"The paper is legal all right," said Seryozha solemnly,
speaking to the shades of his father and mother, and pursing
his face into a man-of-the-worldly look. "As legal as possible.
Mr. Chew is a famous lawyer in London. He never would
write an illegal paper."
Wilfred, opening his eyes for a moment, found the eyes
of both Russians fixed upon him. He was one who always
put the best construction on any ambiguity, and that two
Russians should look at him implied some pleasing com-
pliment just uttered in their outlandish tongue. He bowed
pleasantly in answer to their look. But bowing, which he
always did thoroughly and briskly, being always quite sure
of his occasion, now started a ball rolling in his head. Some-
thing went on bowing by itself inside his brain; the room
bowed round him—
or rather curtsied, in silly acknowledg-
ment of this something inside his head that went on bow-
ing. Was his outer skull really wagging? he asked himself in
some consternation. Could this uncertain ball be the head
of Wilfred Chew, Esquire? A slight bumpas his forehead
hit the table showed him that his head, though unusually
m 204 m
independent, was still attached to his body, but, since the
forehead was on the table, he might as well let it stay there.
'Then they will think I am simply asleep," he thought,
cunningly. "Any gentleman may go to sleep without being
thought morally affected." It was quite outside his plan
actually to go to sleep. His pretense of sleep took on an
aspect of revenge, almost, in his own mind as he shut his
eyes. "Well, if people wiJi talk Russian for six hours with-
out a break, they can't be surprised if their superiors seem
to go to sleep." He listened upward, as it were, feeling that
he was turning his ears like a dog—listened to the sound
of Pavel's talk. It sounded like shyok-shyeh-shyok-shyeh,
and in Wilfred's ears it swelled and dwindled like the hum-
ming one hears when under chloroform, or like the wowing
of an airplane engine in the sky.
While he was still marveling at the fact that this con-
tagious bowing craze seemed to be affecting his hearing
and making sound bow too, a sudden startling silence fell
in the room. The light inside Wilfred's eyelids changed
from scarlet to deep purple. Some one must be taking the
lamp away. Heavy feet trampled cautiously out of the
room, the rhythm of their tread adjusting itself to the
rhythm of Wilfred's throbbing attention. Tramp-ti—
tramp-ti—tramp-ti—and then a check, and a woman's
voice "Ah PavJik/"—
a voice of almost unbearable disap-
pointment.
Wilfred lifted his pendulum head only enough to be able
to lean his chin instead of his brow upon his hands. His
head might actually roll off if he should rear it unsupported
into the swinging air again. Across a glimmering silver plain
of lampless tablecloth, he saw a perfectly still golden scene
framed in the doorway. Pavel Ostapenko, holding the lamp
a little crooked but not dangerously so, stood facing his
wife in the passage, his eyes stretched to an alert glare, like
a squirrel's eyes. Varvara, in a blue cotton kimono, stood
m 205 m
defiantly across the passage, watching her husband with a
defiant dark look. Her wine-colored birthmark looked like
an eccentric shadow thrown by a more ominous flame than
the lamp's light. Seryozha, against the opposite wall, was
drawing a little parcel from his pack. "The fish's liver and
heart/' thought Wilfred. "He is going to face the devil in
that red and white Tan^'a woman. She sleeps behind that
door at the top of the little matted slope out of the kitchen.
I saw her go in when I was washing at the pump." "Pav-
likr cried Van'ara again with a low violence of voice, but
her husband took one step towards her, took Ser\'Ozha's
—
arm and pointed over his wife's shoulder
"At the devil's
door," thought Wilfred. Varvara put both her hands in her
mouth, cramming all her fingers between her lips as though
frantically trying to tear them to pieces. She looked like a
witch, grinning fixedly through the fringe of her fingers.
Pavel began talking again. W^ow—wow—wow—
, heard
\\^ilfred. Wilfred's heavy eyelids dropped like a curtain on
the bright scene, and when next he half lifted them there
was no light except the light of the kitchen fire, blurring
and quickening on the passage walls, like breath dimming
a \^•indow-pane. There were distant voices in the kitchen.
Wilfred's perceptive senses became mixed in a drowsiness,
and the voices became a cloud, a curious menacing cloud
like a wing, each spasm of sound a feather in the wing—
the whole flaked cloud coming nearer and nearer on a
wind that blew in regular throbbing gusts. Before this wind
all the trees in the world bowed, and all the leaves on all the
trees were blo\\n so as to show their white linings—white
flecks showing silver in a moonlight that streamed from no
visible moon. The moonlight had a breathless quality, in
spite of the wind. Ever^^thing in the world was flawed and
burnt with sparks of white; all the stars of the sky, fleeing
from that stupendous winged dragon of a cloud, were lying
dying in agony in the dust, like fish thrown up by a great
Jlfl 206 fiJJ
departed wave. Trees, houses, deserts, and mountains were
caked, clogged, with dying, gasping stars. The pursuing
cloud strode across the sky; one could hear now the ap-
proaching boom—boom—boom of its wings. And Wil-
fred, sweating with excitement, addressed the jury, though
his voice was a little thick. '1 know how you bind dragons,
gentlemen," said Wilfred. "With one hand you take them
behind the gills and with the other behind the wingpits—
(wingpits? Well, armpits. W^y not wingpits?) Yes, with
the other firmly under the wingpits and thus they are per-
fectly helpless." He said this bravely and the jury was ob-
viously impressed. Tire jury numbered thousands—their
little silver-white faces upturned, all over the twilit limitless
hall. One must be brave before such a crowd of puny dying
white faces—
yet, as the wide earth-shaking booming of
wings drew closer and closer, Wilfred wondered whether he
could really master so frightful an enemy single-handed.
Boom! hooml boom! BOOM!—the monster was upon
him; it had only a little blank disc for a face—how much
more terrible than gnashing teeth and flashing eyes! Wil-
fred suddenly shouted in such a great voice that the strong
wind was checked and the galloping cloud thrown back on
its haunches. Asmodeus. Asinodeus. Asmodeus. Nowwhat?
thought Wilfred, mad to show his own monstrous power.
One hand pinching the gills and the other the soft bending
ribs (a lizard's ribs), a twirl . . . round and round the
sequin-scaled body whipped the rope, flipped skillfully by
Wilfred's heroic hand. '1 am bound—
I am bound—
I
ambound," piped the little fading disc that was the demon's
face. But, oh, the scales were cold. They burned like naked
ice. The great icy body leaped, squirmed, and writhed like
a hooked fish. Here, a limb struggled loose—Wilfred
lashed it with another loop; there, the tail began sweeping
free—
it was bound before more than a paltry million stars
had been annihilated; here, a claw reached out and was
m 207 ffi
instantly netted. The vast faceless thing heaved, powerless,
agonized.. . . Yet, what was that—boom! boom! boom!
BOOM! again? Was some outlying coil breaking free? A
scarlet air was blinding the world, a scarlet pain was riveted
like a helmet on the hero's brow. Walls, a table, lamplight,
a smell of roast goose—
little dazzling homely things im-
prisoned him. Here was the room again, safe now from its
terrific menace. Pavel Ostapenko was coming in with the
lamp. He would want to hear the news of Wilfred's victory,
of course, yet it was difficult to talk through such a taste in
the mouth—such a band of pain round the skull.
'1 bound Asmodeus! I bound him!" cried Wilfred. "Ah
—my head! my head! . . . Yet I bound him—Asmo-
deus. . . r
Ostapenko sat down at the table and buried his face in
his hands.
"W^ere is Saggay Saggayitch?" asked Wilfred, thickly,
feeling the need of an interpreter.
"Sergei Sergeievitch? Oi! where—where?" groaned Pavel
in English.
This unexpected proof of linguistic sympathy encouraged
Wilfred to begin to tell Ostapenko about his dream in
detail. He never could quite believe that people really
didn't understand English. Incomprehension was a sort of
coyness on their part, which brisk treatment might help
them to overcome.
But Ostapenko only replied by groans; only when Var-
vara came in did the talk begin again, and then, of course,
in no more intelligent language than that outlandish Rus-
sian. Shyeh-shyeh shyok-shyok wow-wow—
as though by
its pulsing it was measuring off the seconds of this endless
night.
"Don't Russians ever go to bed?" thought Wilfred.
Clasping his aching head without disguise, he got up and
stumbled over to the sofa. None of them cared that he had
f^ 208 £iJ3
bound Asmodeus for their sake. By the way—why Asmo-
deus? He lay down on the sofa and was instantly drowned
in profound dark sleep.
'Tou needn't look at me like that, Varya/' said Pavel,
raising his tired face. 'It seems to me you have lost your
senses. Here we have a charming and eligible young man
—
a kinsman of my own—whom our daughter has chosen
willingly as her husband"
'Tavlik—think."
"Well, my dear, Fm not jumping to any conclusions.
Fm only asking you not to be so sure that your daughter
shared your own ignorance as to the actual significance of
that paper she so eagerly signed. She has plenty of sense,
and she must have realized that one doesn't sign lawyers'
papers without committing oneself to something. She real-
ized from the first, I think, that it made a married woman
of her. She was probably waiting and wondering, in her
"
room—
a neglected bride
He paused to listen for that urgent, 'Tavlik—think"
again, but it did not come. Hearing no protest from his wife,
he allowed his always self-sufficient mind to nurse the illu-
sion that he had prevailed. Varya believed him—and why
not? He had told her the truth. The paper was binding, the
marriage sanctified by lawyers' law, according to Western
European custom if not Russian custom. He was not ac-
customed to imagining what lay behind other people's
silences, nor had he any ears to hear things that were not
uttered. His roving telltale eyes, however, refused to look
at his wife.
His voice began again with a challenging confident sound.
"Tanya's consent means the more because she is by no
means easy to please.. . . Seven betrothals behind her, all
broken by her own overfastidiousness and whims. Here we
have the pair, obviously falling in love at first sight, like
the story books. Here we have Sergei Sergeievitch only too
m 209 m
willing to overlook the unfortunate chops and changes of
the past (which we have not concealed from him), pro-
posing for our daughter most ardently, and Tanya at once
showing an equal eagerness to be his wife. Here we have,
most fortunately, on the spot, an English-trained lawyer of
a high degree of learning, kindly arranging for us a legal
marriage paper such as is daily drawn up in London or
Paris or New York or any other sophisticated city—
a
form of marriage which, in the absence of a Russian priest,
is the best we can possibly hope for. How very very much
more fortunate we are than those Russian families—we
know many of them—who in these hard times, for lack
of any religious marriage facilities and too ignorant to
obtain legal help, have to dispense with any ceremony at
all, however naturally moral, modest, and respectable they
may be. We, on the other hand, have a paper, properly
signed and in my safe keeping, and if things go wrong I
"
now have a means of protecting my daughter
'1 can't hear their voices in the kitchen now," said
Varvara.
"Well then, we must suppose they've done all the talk-
ing they want—in the kitchen," said Pavel with a bluster-
ing uneasiness. "But, Varya, listen—what other marriage
ceremony can you hope for? Whatwould satisfy you? True,
in old Russia nothing short of a ceremony in church would
have contented us (little as I, a modernist, believe in these
superstitions). But we are not in Russia now. Weare exiles.
We must no longer feel provincial and Russian in our
prejudices. Weare citizens of the world now. WTiat is good
enough for sophisticated modern people in the great cities
of Europe must be good enough for us. We must move
with the times. There's nothing else for it. Angels aren't
likely to come down and conduct an orthodox Russian
marriage service for us. That paper, I assure you, satisfied
me, a business man, as being comprehensive and legal. You
m 210 m
can't read English, but I can, and I read every word of it.
In it Sergei Sergeievitch swears to be a faithful husband to
our Tanya, to support her as long as they both live, to pro-
vide for her in case of his death, to take her to his home and
treat her as what she is
—his legal wife. What more can
he do? He has signed the paper—you saw him do it. The
lawyer had signed it already. I have signed it to show my
approval and my willingness to do my part—give our girl
the dowry that we always meant to give her, and pay for
the valuable services of the lawyer. Tanya signed it with
her eyes open. I feel perfectly satisfied about it."
"Then why were you groaning just now as I came into
the room?" asked Varvara.
"Why. . . well, Fm tired, of course, and overwrought.
One has one's feelings as a father, and one's only child's
marriage night is an emotional experience for any parent.
Even though I am perfectly satisfied that the children are
man and wife, and that Well, Varya, what's the use
of arguing? I gave in to you on every point you mentioned.
I let you have a talk alone with the child—and I don't
believe you did anything more helpful than cry over her.
I admitted the sense of your suggestion that young Sergei
shouldn't immediately take her away from her home, and he
wilhngly promised to stay here for a fortnight, so as to
allow the little creature to adapt herself to marriage in the
comfort of familiar surroundings, with you and me at hand.
And you saw how Tanya accepted what I said. She was
listening attentively to me, I could see that, though she
never has a closely attentive look; and if she was staring
at her husband all the time, well, isn't that natural, in a
young bride? And then, when I had explained to her gently
that by signing that lawyer's paper the marriage had become
a legal thing and that her husband was nowentitled to some
proof of her love and duty, did she protest? Mydear Varya,
you irritate me inexpressibly when you look like that. I ask
JlJJ 211 £iJ3
you, did she? Compare her behavior tonight with what she
did when Boris kissed her at the kissing game—with the
fuss she kicked up when Sasha Weber pressed her to marry
him before the end of the summer—with her screaming
hysterical fit when Petya Isaev kissed her in the garden on
her birthday. Well, I ask you—what did she do tonight
when she came back from her weep with you? She walked
across the kitchen to her husband and just said his name,
Seryozha—
just like that, in a soft voice—Seiyozha"—
(Ostapenko wheezed a restrained falsetto). "Why, Varya,
what's the matter with you? You yourself were convinced
at the time. You said to me, 'Come away, Pavlik, it's their
affair, after all. Let's leave them to work it out together,
whichever way they wish.'*'
Varvara was shaken. "Can it be really all right?" she
asked of the witnessing air. She was so well accustomed to
thinking that everything had an odd contrary rightness of
its own, if an Ostapenko thought it right. "Oh, Pavlik—
if
you would only come free of these words and tell me out
of your own heart if it's all right."
He went on talking. She had known he would never
come free of words. He could not. She knew the expression
of his mouth—the set of lips determined to convince by
words alone. Even when she asked him, as she often did, to
think—Pavlik—think—she knew it was impossible for
him to think as well as talk—
to go behind his ownplausible
words, to compare them with the facts in his own brain, and
trim his argument to the shape of his inmost conviction.
She knew that words were in themselves the stuff of his
conviction—he believed what he said, instead of saying
what he believed. Yet this was Ostapenkoism; she did not
criticize it; words were his genius, she thought. Outsiders
might say that he quibbled, but his wife shaped his quib-
bling to fit into her pride in him. Only Pavlik could quibble
as superbly as he quibbled. Only Pavlik could make a thing
fiTil 212 £23
actually true by proving ingeniously that it was true. He
could mold truth. She began to see that this elaborate
quibble about Mr. Chew's paper was sealing the paper itself
with an actuality, a significance, that it had not seemed to
possess. The paper had floated as negligibly as a dead leaf
into Varvara's notice, and now here it was, transmuted by
Ostapenko argument into a heavy lawyer's parchment, a
thing to be kept in the safe, a thing solid enough for the
future to be built on. It blew in like a leaf and settled like
a stone. Pavlik's talk and magic had turned the blowing
fancy to stone—
to the cornerstone of the house.
Varvara was in the grip of reaction from her first mo-
ment of furious anger with Pavlik and her suspicion of him.
When she had first seen him walking toward the kitchen
threshold, pointing out Tanya's door to young Sergei Mali-
nin, all her faith in him had seemed for a moment to be
cracking. At that moment she could have torn him to pieces;
he was something namelessly hideous—naked of words at
last. Now that he had clothed his intentions with their
usual fine wrappings of explanation, she felt like a child
who, in the dark, thinks it sees in a moving shadow at the
door a bogey arriving frightfully to devour it
—and then
in the next moment identifies the thing as the sweet famil-
iar shadow of its mother and feels incredibly safe again.
Varvara felt the remorse such a child might feel—
remorse
and sheepishness, for having so mistaken that loving
shadow, misheard that dear step, repulsed with panic a
friend so tried and so trusted. Must she not make up for
her first panic of misunderstanding by understanding with
double intensity?
It was the more possible for Pavel to convince Varvara,
because she felt herself, in this matter, on his ground, not
her own. She had no illusions about the incompleteness of
her own nature, though she would have resented bitterly
any suggestion that an outsider could see her lack of life.
O 213 ffl
Living with the ebulHent Pavel had taught her secret hu-
militv. She therefore attached no moral superiority to her
fear of love—
no you ought not—only an alas, I am not.
Her natural instinct, even if Tatiana had been married with
every possible rite of orthodoxy, would have been to lie
awake with tears of horror throughout her daughter's wed-
ding night. This she recognized as morbidness, and was
therefore the more inclined to distrust her own almost un-
bearable instinct of reluctance to believe in the sudden
significance of this lawyer's paper. Paper blessing—church's
blessing—archimandrite's blessing—God's blessing—her
answer to each or all would have been—No—
no—
no—
not ioi my Tanya.. . .
Among Ostapenkos, she was accustomed to being more
sober but less inspired. She had felt essentially right as she
barred her husband's path to her daughter's door, but she
was used to feeling right, yet knowing herself wrong. The
strange rather than the reasonable must be her accepted
standard. The breath of sobriety she introduced was an
irrelevance, in this strange family she loved.
Yet—in this case
—Tanya—that white baffling door
of Tanya's fortress to be knocked upon—
to be assailed with
such abrupt news from the strong thick world of men. . . .
'Til just stand in the passage for a minute to listen if
I hear voices," she said. "He may be arguing with her,
trying to persuade her against her will. He's just a boy—
it's
difficult for him. Supposing she's crying.. . . She cries so
quietly. ..."
"A funny thing," said Pavel, "to be expecting to hear the
bride crying on a night like this. ..."
Varvara stood in the passage for a minute or t^^•o. There
was no sound. She turned. Through the front door, left
open for coolness this hot night, she saw the houses of
Mi-san roofed with silver; she heard the distant barking of
a dog sounding like a beating on copper. The alchemist
m 214 m
stillness transmuted to bright metal the polished leaves of
the zinnias and shrubs in the garden. The sky shone like a
spangled dragon's wing. There were even stars in the dust
of the street—
a dust of stars, too, over the brick material
of the frame of the door, and stars in every spider's-web.
After all, she's just another flower in another garden,
thought Varya dreamily, another starry seed on the wind,
blowing home to earth. She was thinking wordlessly; she
was seeing a vision of the breaking of dear loneliness, the
breaking of the virgin round world by the forces of fire and
water and wind, the breaking open of strong remote moun-
tains, breaking into chasms and seas, craters, valleys and
peaks—the dumb world breaking with a song of thunder,
and broken, being clothed with intention at last—clothed
with snows and flowers and blue veils of ice and deserts of
corn-colored sand and feathers of fire—
a world the richer
for its broken integrity. To make a statue was to break a
stone. Being alive was a breaking of death. To become
something was to shatter the peace of being nothing.
Come home—come home—come home, Tanya.. . .
Varvara roused herself with a start, finding her lips parted
to utter a call. She went back into the living-room and
found her husband groaning again, his head in his hands.
"What is distressing you so, Pavlik? You are so sure it is
all right, and yet you moan and mourn."
'Tschah! I don't know. Leave me alone. No, I'll tell you.
Fmnot worrying about our Tanya—she's all right. She has
to grow up sooner or later, and she showed more feeling
about this boy than she did about any of the others. I'm
sure we were right to strike while the iron was hot. No, I
worry about the boy—
a decent bright boy—and my
cousin's son, too. Wliat if it were really true that there's a
curse on any lover who comes near our Tanya? Wecouldn't
say we hadn't had full warning—she really has sucked the
life out of every one of the lads who were attracted by her
tSl^ 215 tS&
good looks. Supposing it really is a fact that there is some-
thing deadly in her icy pretty looks. Supposing we find this
nice boy dead by her side in the morning.. . . What should
we say—how should we explain it? The neighbors would
—
all say
'well, youVe had fair warning, haven't you? Ifs as
good as murder/ One can't disregard such a possibihty.
There's something so very strange in the perfectly consistent
string of disasters that has followed each of her affairs—
disasters to the lads themselves, I mean. Fve heard of such
curses" (Pavel always had precedents ready). '1 knew of a
nice old woman—
very rich, very quiet, very good-natured
and considerate—whose servants always died before they
had been in her service a year. She was obliged at last to go
and live in a hotel at Yalta, and even there, they say, the
chambermaids kept on developing mysterious diseases.
There are such cases
—
it's no good shutting one's eyes to
them. There certainly is something fatal about our Tanya's
effect on men—there isn't a single one of her admirers that
hasn't reason to regret ever having set eyes on her. Sasha's
dead; Isaev, in the Chinese army, is as good as dead; young
Stepan Soloviev is a hopeless sot; Boris threw up a respect-
able job to go and be a pimp in Shanghai; Vanya seems
to have gone entirely off his head. One can't ignore all
that, Varya, one can't say it's coincidence—
it does look
like the work of some kind of devil that possesses our girl.
Have we thrown away the life of this nice boy, Sergei Ser-
geievitch? His affair has gone further than any of the others
—the curse would affect him more immediately and fatally.
. . . Oh, Varya, I have a dreadful premonition... I have
a terrible feeling that in the morning we shall find him
dead—and Tanya icy and quiet as she always is, no sorrier
than if she had crushed a spider by mistake. What could
we say? Howcould we explain it to his father and mother?"
"It's the night makes you have such fancies, Pavlik," said
Varvara. "Two or three o'clock in the morning is always
m^ 216 tSli
the time when people who can*t sleep have their dreadful
fancies/'
"Two or three o'clock in the morning is when people
die/' said Pavel Ostapenko, shuddering. "O God! what have
I done that my only child is so cursed that I have to fear so
for every one who comes near her? What a silence is in this
house, Varya! One can hear no sound of life at all."
"One couldn't, anyway, from here."
Ostapenko looked at the clock. "I wonder why people die
in the small hours. I wonder if it's because all the demons
of the night have gathered strength out of the dark by then."
"No, certainly it isn't. It is because the pulse beats most
weakly then."
"Yes, but the demons of the night perhaps seize that
opportunity. Perhaps people always die then for that reason.
The dead never come back to explain to us the deadly wiles
of demons. OGod! perhaps the boy, even as we speak, feels
something freezing his heart, and thinks: 'They told me
the truth about this haunted girl. Why wasn't I wise in
time?'"
even a little "Perhaps you are a little tired, Pavlik," said Varvara. "Oi
Well, you know, Pavlik, you drank a great
deal of champagne."
Pavel groaned again. His sense of guilt abouthis insistence
on the consummation of the marriage had strangely dis-
guised itself, transferred itself to a fear for Seryozha's safety.
His imagination was very strong when dealing with the in-
human and mysterious, although it could never penetrate
a fellow mortal's skin and show him a glimpse of the rea-
sonable and sensitive hearts of his neighbors.
"Why don't you go to bed?" suggested Varvara. "You are
doing no good by sitting up—only tormenting yourself."
Pavel rose to his feet and left the room so promptly that
Varvara looked after him in surprise. She was not accus-
tomed to having her suggestions so instantly followed.
tSi 217 M
After a moment she rose, too. She looked down for a
minute at the sleeping Wilfred. His mouth was wide open;
his gold tooth looked ashamed with so much uncovered
pink and cavernous mouth round it; as a rule/its glory was
enhanced by the discreetness of its glimpsed glitter. "How
hospitable we are to our visitors/' thought Varvara with a
faint sneer, looking down at Wilfred's helpless sagging face.
Then she went to her bedroom, pausing a moment in the
passage to listen to the silence.
Her husband was not in their bedroom. She lay down on
the bed in her kimono, and shut her eyes. In the glimmer-
ing steel light of early dawn, the dark mark on her cheek
looked like a third sunken eye.
She opened her eyes an hour later to find that her hus-
band was still not by her side. As she went back along the
passage to look for him, he came in at the front door, look-
ing exhausted and wretched leaning on an earthy spade.
"Why, Pavlik, where have you been? You are all earthy
—look at your hands. You look so tired. . . . What have
you been doing?"
"Oh leave me alone—don't nag at me! . . . Oh, Varya,
I have such a terrible presentiment of evil to that boy. I'm
sure she breathes death . . . the more I think of it, the
more sure I am. . . . We are as good as murderers . .
."
Varvara sighed. "Oh, Pavlik, how obstinately fanciful
you are when you have been drinking. Now think—think
of the ordinary everyday world; think of our dear little
Tanya learning to knit socks for you, learning to ride a horse,
helping me to make the beds and to shell peas.. . . De-
mons don't live in such simple things. Here is Katya—she
shall make us a cup of tea each."
For the first beam of the sun, aiming like a wary archer
across the red plain, always woke Katya to her work. The
energetic old woman had no alarm clock; she relied on the
sharp tip of the first ray to pry her little red eyelids apart.
SlU 218 UiJJ
"A cup of tea/* she repeated after Varvara, opening that
kitchen door which had been such a tiptoe secret all night,
and stumping briskly into the kitchen.
Varvara stood in the front doorway, watching the sun
rise—watching the sun chmb surefooted up straight rails
of red cloud.
Pavel followed Katya into the kitchen. "Katya, you know
our little Tanya was married last night/' said Pavel in an
uneasy whisper, pinning the old woman's attention with
his wide sharp eyes.
"Married!" exclaimed Katya shrilly.
"Pssst! Yes, married—by this Chinese guest who is a
lawyer and knows the London way of marrying without a
priest."
"There is no such thing as marriage without a priest,"
began Kat}'a loudly.
"Devil take you, old woman, I tell you there isr said
Pavel, convulsed for a second with fury by this bluff attack
on his edifice. "Tanya is married. She is a wife, legally. She
is in that room there with her husband—and with my
blessing, I tell you. Do you think I should not be the first
to make my only daughter's honor safe? Don't be such a
fool, old woman, but listen to me. You know Tanya—
you've known her all her life. You know she's not like other
girls, quite—
easy in love, accustomed to kissing and flirt-
ing. I want to know if they're all right—
I must know—
and I daren't look in—
I daren't. . .
."
"Pavel Nicholaievitch, you've been drinking. Whyshould
you want to spy on a man and his wife—
if man and wife
they are? . .
."
"They are
—they are!" cried Pavel frantically. "I swear
they are legally man and wife. . . . It's only that I have a
presentiment.. . . Katya, be a good woman and just open
that door a crack—
just peep in. ... I must know the
worst now. ... I daren't look myself.. .
."
m 219 m
"Ah, tschah!" said Katya. She waddled up the little
matted slope and listened at Tanya's door. "There's no
sound/' she said.
"No sound!" echoed Pavel, terrified. "Ah, dear Katya,
just open the door a crack, very quietly, tell me how they
look."
Alarmed and shocked by his wild manner, Katya cau-
tiously opened the door a very little, and put her fat red
face to the crack. When she turned her face it was creased
into a sentimental smile. "I must say they are a pretty pair,"
she said, as pleased as though she had had a hand in the
creation of their beauty. "As pretty as fairies, asleep in each
other's arms, his lips to her cheek . .
."
"O my God! Safe! Safe!" cried Pavel, and rushed down
the passage, calhng: "Tea—
tea! Varitchka, where's my
tea?" Then he ran like a boy back into the kitchen. "Katya,
you might tell Yi to fill up that deep trench he will find
in the garden to the east of the poppy bed."
"I can see it from here," said Katya. "It looks like a
grave."
"Yes—
yes. I thought I might want to bury some rubbish
today.. . . But I don't want it now. Tell Yi to set to work
on it at once. . . . O God!" he cried, running back to Var-
vara. "Varitchka, can't we praise God or something. . .
?"
iM m
• T0T*T*1 I 91 •! •!
mmmMmm
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Seryozha's dog, all netted with spiders' webs and glazed
with dew, stood in the doorway, collecting with a high
nose the too faint traces of Seryozha's vicinity. The smell
of putrefying fish clinging to Seryozha's pack in the passage-
way cheered the dog a good deal; it knew that smell by now
as part of the family. The house seemed to be empty of
everything but air, and this happy patch of smelly air was
a sort of ghost of Seryozha—the next best thing to the
presence of that solid and glorious being. The dog stood
for a long time with its nose pressed very hard to a spot on
the floor on which Seryozha had dropped, hours before, a
small shred of fish liver. For quite a minute, the bereaved
dog licked this spot slowly, romantically, like a melancholy
epicure.
Slanting from the windows were shallow barred slides of
sunlight, down and across which raced and blew and eddied
the little light glittering typhoons of dust stirred up by
Katya's recent sweeping. The pale floor mats were a rec-
tangular maze of sunlight and shadow; and flies seemed to
browse in these square fields of sunlight like cattle seen from
an airplane. Now and then this restful illusion was broken
flllJ 221 fiJJ
by one fly rising and flying petulantly away as another one
alighted. A sequin-blue butterfly with a long tail flew un-
certainly in from the garden, its shadow dodging across the
fields of sun and dikes of shade, and settled on Tanya's blue
cloak which hung on a peg. It opened and closed its wings
slowly before its shadow, like a queen trying on a new
dress before the glass. Summer morning danced in the
house, but, to the dog, human bustle alone spelled morn-
ing—and human bustle was disturbingly lacking here.
There were so many strangers in the house—the blue
butterfly, a couple of thistledowns riding high across the
ceiling, a muddy spade with a rather dead section of worm
on it, leaning against the wall, a riding-whip smelling of
horse, a noisy bee that hovered about the dog's shrinking
ear, an insolent brown hen on the threshold—
all strangers
—
no friends—and the dog loathed strangers. Strangers so
often have stings, like bees, or sticks, like beggars, or kicks,
like horses; they never smell right.
A smell casts no shadow before; dogs, therefore, who are
led through life by the nose, have to be intensely conserva-
tive. They can tolerate no new departures because they can
know no destinations. Seryozha's dog, though trying to be
brave, felt as far away from its own tried and trusted circum-
stances as a man might feel who found himself the first to
set foot on the moon. To the dog this house seemed as
shimmering and appalling and silent as the moon; this
bright gloss of sunlit air, speckled with smell-less strangers,
lacking the immediate familiar smell of known gods, was
as lifeless as the brittle bodiless glare that lays gray shadows
at the feet of the moon's starved peaks. Traveling from
place to place, one carried one's own exciting, flying world
along with one; somewhere close in front of one's thrilled
nose was home, or something like home; somewhere close
behind one's tail was one's own tramping homespun god.
But arrival at Mi-san had meant to the dog an elaborate
M 222 MB
homelessness. That little spot of concentrated rotten fish
smell on the floor was all that was left of home.
Tiptoeing on stiff suspicious toes into the living-room,
the dog was much pleased to find Wilfred Chew lying
asleep on the sofa. As a rule, the dog thought nothing of
Wilfred, but this morning the man could certainly be pro-
moted to the rank of an encouraging smell. The dog pushed
its nose into Wilfred's eye, savoring the blessed tang of
something known before. Wilfred, with a loud groan,
turned over, flinging his arms across his frowning shut eyes,
and the dog whipped its precious self away to the other
side of the room, fearing a kick.
A very small piece of goose skin, which, under the table,
had escaped Katya's active brush, comforted the dog for a
moment, and this snack inspired the lost animal to go to
the kitchen. It knew where the kitchen was; any dog could
find a kitchen, even in the moon. Katya had gone to market.
The kitchen door at the end of the passage was ajar, and the
dog pushed in. In a bucket by the pump it found a priceless
treasure of goose bones and gravy-splashed scraps.
Seryozha, coming with a dazed, quiet step into the
kitchen, saw his dog and loved it as he had never loved it
before. That dusty brindled back seemed to shine with a
light of blessed familiarity. Seryozha's tired eyes, looking
at it, seemed to be stroked with a kind of home balm. He
stood still watching the dog, his consciousness numbed—
as it always was—by the thrill of seeing an animal enjoy-
ing itself by itself, unaware of his presence. To watch his
dog smiling and snorting into its bucket of ambrosia almost
made him feel as if this old worried Seryozha were standing
here watching his young self, careless and apart—his young
lost self, enjoying something as this old watching Seryozha
would never enjoy anything again.
The dog looked up and saw Seryozha. It cringed and
crawled toward him, expecting a kick for thieving, and
tS^ 223 Ml
Seryozha, beaming at it, gave it a little soft kick to oblige it.
While he focused his eyes exclusively upon it, blurring from
his sight the strange surroundings, he could imagine him-
self that young happy Seryozha again at home in his moth-
er's kitchen. He could pretend that he would look up in a
minute from the dog's delighted writhings and see the white
pansy face of that old clock in the marbled case on the
dresser—that kind foolish dial with the six rubbed out—
look up and see that it was time to go to work again—
to
begin another safe known day.
Seryozha, with the dog hurrying triumphantly at his
calf—almost pressing its front teeth against his calf in its
anxiety not to lose him again—went out through the
kitchen door. He crossed the walled Japanese garden and
went out into the acre or so of Ostapenko estate, half of
which was a vegetable garden and half a railed inclosure for
horses. A Korean in his white puffed clothes—looking like
a cream cracker—
was filling up a trench in the earth of
the garden, and Seryozha, loathing the man because he was
the only man in sight—and a stranger—put as much
distance as possible between them and sat down on the
edge of a little stream that ran at the foot of the fence. The
high grass, tufted with wild blue geraniums and scarlet
lilies, hid Seryozha from the world as he sat down, dangling
his feet over the stream. His dog, pressing its seat as near
as possible to his, sat down, too, and blew great hot loving
breaths into his ear.
Seryozha threw his arms round the dog's neck and cried
into its shoulder.
For the first time in his life, Seryozha was shaken—
shaken in his stalwart anonymity—called home to self-
consciousness by a sort of earthquake of the heart. He had
been invisible, he had been a matter of course, he had been
too close to see, he had been a hollow yet satisfactory person
labeled Sergei Sergeievitch Malinin. Hehad no moreknown |
m 224 m
the creature that moved behind that name than he had
known the shape of the bones that moved beneath his
flesh and skin. The only mystery about the anonymous
blank life that lay behind the name Sergei Malinin was
found in the repeated utterance of the name itself, curiously
enough. Adelicious poised strangeness perched on the peak
of the soul, when one said that name—Sergei Malinin—
Sergei Malinin—
a hundred times over. This slippery trans-
parent Ser) ozha, through whom,as it seemed, one could see
the sky, was a hill of glass on which no bird but that winged
mystery of his own mesmeric name could find foothold. As
for love—women's love—friend's love—
self-love—
a hill
of glass afforded no hospitality to such flying visitors.
Now, this earthquake intrusion of a trespasser had shaken
him awake—had forced him to turn and meet himself.
He was recognized as a man, as he had longed to be recog-
nized; he was traveling, far from .his mother, as he had
longed to travel; he was married, by his own expressed wish,
to the most beautiful and gentle girl he had ever seen. And
he felt the lonely fright of a chicken outside the egg, of a
fledgeling outside the nest, of a weaned puppy refused its
mother's warm teats. He shook with a fevered longing to
go back—
to go back into safety—
to be warm and careless
in little yesterday again, instead of turned loose in this wide
draughty today, with no guide but his own reluctant ma-
turity.
Seryozha tried to dislodge a stone in the bank with his
heel; he kicked it spitefully, as though he were trying to
demolish something menacing. Growing up, then, was a
trap; he had been lured into it by an exquisite decoy and
must spend the rest of his life pressing his face against iron
bars. There was Tanya, the decoy, a prisoner with him—
still exquisite—
still his. But Seryozha had never felt the
need of a friend or a comforter—had never yet desired
reinforcement against himself or any one else; he had not
tS& 225 M
known that even his mother's affection was valuable to
him—he had thought it contemptible, quite negligible—
though now he saw it tenderly as part of the furniture of
little safe yesterday. He had a mournful senseless vision of
himself now, spinning a whipping-top in the street of Chi-
tao-kou—a game that needs no partner. And here was
Tanya—
a spray of orchids handed to a person who needed
both his hands for the whipping of his top.
What was that Mr. Chew had said about cold devils?
There were no devils, really, but there were strangers. As a
boy, yesterday, Seryozha had never noticed strangers. Now,
it seemed, a stranger could trespass—could lie in one's
arms all night and yet never be known, never be simple,
forgotten, easy, taken for granted. He must live uneasy,
now, he must come inside himself and think. This was the
result of the cold presence of strangers; no magic smoke—
no heart and liver of an enchanted fish—could exorcise
that trespassing presence.
Seryozha's body was not accustomed to being used by
thought. It scarcely knew how to behave while thinking.
His heel kicked and kicked at the stone, and when the
stone at last fell with a splash into the stream, his body
felt innocently triumphant, and his lips began to whistle
by themselves—a low, flat whistle.
His dog was greatly cheered by this sound, and still more
delighted to be suddenly pushed off the bank into the
water. Seryozha's body, having achieved one splash, desired
another. The dog laughed in the water, rolling its entranced
eyes upward, and, finding that it could not jump up to the
top of the high bank again from the hampering water, ran
gayly a few yards down the current to a point at which the
stream flattened out into strands of sand and shallow bub-
bling rapids over pebbles—
a perfect working model of a
Manchurian river. Seryozha's eyes—always alert for minia-
ture things—noticed the fidelity to fact of this toy river.
flU 226 tS^
And his eyes remembered the spring in Manchuria—that
rolhng golden lark-shrill Manchurian spring that was, to
him, home and yesterday. He remembered tremendous
auburn distances and wide tender curves of marbled colors
in varied earth—yellow deepening to orange—
orange to
red—red paling to sandy—sandy to cream—with here and
there the faint green flush of pricking grass—and on every
rainbow hillside, a white spot of Korean moving slowly along
the edge of a growing parallelogram of new-furrowed land
behind a yellow blob of bullock.
"Ah, tschah!" said Seryozha, throwing a stone at a bird.
The stone rustled and ricocheted through the bush beneath
which the bird sat, but the bird scarcely moved. "A funny
thing," thought Seryozha. "A bird that's not afraid of a
stone. . .
." He took off his shoes and splashed across the
stream. The bird—
a sparrow—looked at him with an an-
guished round eye, but it scarcely moved. Seryozha put his
hand over it, loving it as soon as he saw it was too sad to be
his prey. Caked round one of its claws was a ball of clay as
big as a walnut. The bird must have alighted unwarily on
some unusually wet adhesive surface—
it must have been
involved in some combination of circumstances outside
common bird-experience—
so now it went hopelessly en-
cumbered, a crawling thing about the grass instead of a
brown flash in a tree. Seryozha took out his pocket knife,
and with his cautious clever blunt hands began flaking off
the hard-baked mud, sliver by sliver, till first one little scaly
knuckle appeared, then another. The anatomy of birds'
claws he studied by comparison with the free claw, so that
the point of his knife knew where to be bold and where
delicate. The bird's eye, bright and silly as a sequin, re-
mained fixed upon him; its little bones, wrapped thickly yet
unsubstantially in a warm padding of feathers, seemed
swooning in his hand. After half an hour's delicious minc-
ing work, the whole claw was free; the knife had made no
fSh 227 £123
mistake. "Stand up, bird/' said Setyozha impatiently, as the
bird reeled on his wrist. Its freed claw remembered, hesi-
tantly, how to grip; it tautened its body, threw a glance of
sharp loathing at its savior, and flew a few yards. "Oh, get
away now, bird," said Seryozha, and threw a stone at it.
"The darling thing," said Tatiana's voice behind him.
"It thinks itself so clever." She stood in the long grass, bit-
ing a blade of grass, her head bold and vivid against the
faint blue morning sky. "It thinks it used your knife so
neatly—made a fool of you. It thinks you were tr)dng to
eat it or something, and freed it by mistake because it was
so clever. It's laughing up its wing at you."
"It was very kind of me to take so much trouble about a
little idiot of a bird," said Seryozha, throwing stone after
stone at the bird as it fluttered from branch to branch of a
low tree. "You praise these silly beasts so, but, say what you
will, we're better friends to them than they to us."
"Oh, of course . . . but what are friends, after all? Just
messy things.. .
."
She wondered why he looked so sulky. Had she grieved
him? Ought a wife to be somehow different? She thought
alternately. "Well—
it's what I am—he must take it or
leave it . .
." and, "But was I wrong? ought I to have been
different?" She was in two worlds—her heart away in its
solitary and exciting wilderness, her body watching for a
signal from her lover, and desperately ignorant of how to
obey the signal when it should come.
Seryozha was sullenly thinking, who were these two per-
sons discussing nature? Sergei Sergeievitch Malinin, a mar-
ried man, and Tatiana Pavlovna, his wife, two grown-up
people with interesting thoughts. WHiat if he sprang to his
feet now, and ran home? He thought of Sonia Matvievna
—that easy squeaking creature in Chi-tao-kou. Her con-
versation was all giggle—
one giggle for yes—another gig-
gle for no—
no giggle ever meant anything so complicated
fiJJ 228 fSi
as a discussion of a sparrow's reaction to an act of human
helpfulness. Then he remembered the consenting Tanya of
last night. Sonia Matvievna would have had only a giggle
for that, too.
"Ah, Tanya—Tanya—come closer. . .
."
She knelt by his side at once and kissed him lightly on
one eye. His dog, inspired by this, rushed upon him and
kissed him, much more clumsily and ardently, on the other.
They all laughed.
Seryozha stopped laughing rather soon. In fact only the
dog went on. It was insensitive to atmosphere, and knew
nothing about the domestic changes in divine Valhalla since
yesterday. Tatiana stopped laughing and watched Seryozha's
face. Even the kiss hadn't been right, she could see.
Ser}^ozha blinked the eye that she had kissed. It felt
shocked by that light, quiet kiss; the eyelid fluttered by it-
self like the skin of a horse's shoulder. He supposed that he
was hungry, though he wasn't quite sure. The skin of his
face felt disappointed. His ears listened for some loud vul-
gar shout or laugh. Girls were fun, and one was fun to girls.
Yet Tanya, though so lovely, so darling, was no fun—
nor
did she find him fun. W^iat, then, was between them—
something more exciting than fun—
or nothing? Now, for
instance, she suddenly seized his hand. Whyshould she do
this, if it were no joke to her? \Vliy should she want to hold
his not very clean hand—
so quietly, so seriously? Her thin
hand seemed to need no pinching—
no activity at all. He
held it, with a surprise that gradually changed to pleasure.
Vaguely, with no recognition more articulate than a faint
prevision of serenity, he began to know that this quiet taking
for granted was at least as fit a sequel to last night's strange
joy as the restlessness and roguishness of Sonia Matvievna
would have been. Something was born between Seryozha
and Tanya at that moment—
a taking-for-granted for two
flJJ 229 fliij
—
a doubling, instead of a halving, of anonymity and un-
consciousness.
"Do people ever have breakfast, in Korea?" asked Ser-
yozha. The sun was quite high. This visit seemed to lack
landmarks, somehow. And he had promised to stay for a
fortnight. Was it only perhaps hunger that made him feel
that he would never be at home in life again?
They walked toward the house. Seryozha's dog led the
way. It hoped that their destination was the bucket full of
goose scraps, and writhed winningly at the back door. But
Seryozha and Tatiana walked to the front door and into the
living-room.
Pavel Ostapenko sat there, leaning over the still sleeping
Wilfred, looking rather like the Doctor in Sir Luke Fildes'
picture, but not feeling like that at all. Pavel was haggard
and cross. At the moment of his waking, the thought had
broken on his brain like a clap of thunder: "What will hap-
pen when Chew wakes up—sober? What if he says the
paper is not legal?" Pavel, of course, had not for a moment
entertained the thought, "What if I were wrong?"—but
only the much more torturing doubt—"What if he s^ys I
was wrong, and tells the others so?" He had spent an un-
comfortable hour wondering whether the impossible could
happen—whether Pavel Ostapenko could be accused of
having made a mistake. Every voice in the house, except
one, could now be depended on to say, "You were perfectly
right, Pavel Nicholaievitch," and that, of course, was just
the same as being right. But, unfortunately, the one voice
that remained, so far, silent in this necessary chorus was an
indispensable one. And still more unfortunately, the lips
that should form these vital words were sealed by intem-
perate sleep, and the understanding that should evolve the
utterance could not be reached by Ostapenko logic, how-
ever eloquently expressed, even had it been awake. What on
fiffl 230 m
earth was the Almighty about, thought Pavel irritably, to
create such a superfluity of human beings who were un-
familiar with the language that Pavel Ostapenko could use
so skillfully. Unless something was done, an unthinkable
emergency would arise—Pavel Ostapenko would be hu-
miliated in the eyes of his inferiors. It followed that Pavel
must somehow, in some language not yet invented, have a
talk with Wilfred before any one else had a chance to do so.
Pavel must be ready with a sufficiently persuasive argument
to induce Wilfred, the momenthe awoke, to admit—'Tou
were perfectly right, Pa\'el Nicholaievitch, in the course you
took," and to confirm this opinion triumphantly before the
family.
Pavel sat with one elbow on his knee, glaring and breath-
ing hotly at the innocent blank face of Wilfred. Beside him
on a table were one hundred and fifty yen in notes, a Rus-
sian-English dictionary, an elementary English grammar, an
illustrated history of the Russian Empire, several large sheets
of paper covered with English words in wavering block let-
ters, and the deed drawn up by Wilfred the night before.
'Tschah! Go away," whispered Pavel, irascibly, to Ser-
yozha and Tatiana as they came hungrily in. The foolish
interfering creatures might awaken Wilfred prematurely,
and Ser}ozha—the interpreter—would then have the dan-
gerous first word.
Varvara, hearing the young people come in, joined them
at the living-room door, carrying a tray. "Breakfast, Pavlik,"
said Varvara. "It is eleven o'clock."
"Devil take you all!" said Pavel in a furious whisper that
scraped his throat. "Who in the world wants breakfast at
this time of day? Can't you leave the poor devil to finish his
sleep in peace?"
Varvara, carried forward by the slow impetus of her grave
assumption that breakfast was needed, put the tray on the
table before she turned to her husband in surprise. "Who
fliJ 231 M
wants breakfast, you say!" she echoed. "Why, PavHk, every
"
one wants
Pavel rose to his feet in a shivering paroxysm of anger,
and waved his clenched fists in the air. Varvara snatched the
loaded tray up just in time to prevent him from seizing it
and throwing it through the door. With the tray in her
hands, she recovered her hard calm manner. 'Tavel Nicho-
laievitch is rather tired this morning," she said to Seryozha
and, squaring her angular shoulders, she led the retreat from
the room.
Pavel was left with the prostrate Wilfred, whose plaintive
expression suggested that he was locked in a prison of dis-
quieting dreams. One could almost see his teased brain
beating at the closed shutters of his eyes.
"Should I not wake him?" Pavel asked himself. "He isn't
enjoying himself, wherever he is."
But just as he leaned forward to say some urgent awaken-
ing word, the door opened and Katya, the servant, came in,
with an expression of—"Leave him to me; Fll manage
him." Seryozha's dog bustled after her. It thought the stout
kitchen-smelling Katya a most delightful woman, and inno-
cently mistook her for its hostess.
"Pavel Nicholaievitch," said Katya, "you must allow me
"
to lay the table for breakfast. It is
Pavel rushed upon her with a roar, all his teeth showing,
arms and legs sprawling across the air. The outraged old
woman fled a few paces, then tried to make a stand in the
passage. But Pavel slammed the door in her face with such
a bang that the dog squeaked as it fled, believing itself shot.
Tlie noise half roused Wilfred, yet, in spite of the dis-
comfort of his dreams, he was reluctant to wake. He rolled
about on the sofa and buried his face in the cushion, trying
to drive his struggling consciousness back into the safe im-
prisoning corridors of sleep again. Pavel stood over him.
"Curse him!" he cried. "He must be doing it on purpose."
£lllj 232 fS^
He seized the cushion and dragged it from under Wilfred's
head. Wilfred substituted an arm for it. Pavel dragged the
arm away, too.
"Awaken, Mistah Chew, awaken!" he shouted. He had
looked the English word up in his dictionary.
An obstinate sealed look came into Wilfred's face, then a
look of petulance, then a distortion of the most unspeakable
agon}^, then a light of beautiful resignation, then a recol-
lection of the Reverend Oswald Fawcett. Wilfred opened
his eyes, himself again, though rather a melancholy self.
"Hrrgh?" he inquired in a strangled snort, disappointed
with the waking world.
'Is time of breekfast," shouted Pavel, feverishly consult-
ing his English notes. "Mistah—quick—awaken."
Wilfred lay with his eyes wet and callow in their puffed
sockets, like new-born kittens in their lair. His gaze was fixed
with a tranced expression on a spittoon; one would have
said it was his dearest treasure.
Pavel thrust a sheet of paper between Wilfred's eyes and
the spittoon. Wilfred took a minute to adjust his drowsy
focus, and then he recognized his own writing on the paper.
It was the indenture he had drawn up last night. So it had
not been a dream, thought Wilfred, surprised.
Pavel pushed his red beard close to Wilfred's face and
said very loudly in pidgin Russian—for he had forgotten
most of the English words he had prepared, "Eta—bumaga
—hoTOsho—ah?"
"HoioshOy hoTOsho/' mumbled Wilfred, vaguely, feeling
flattered by the word of approval.
Pavel, encouraged, produced another sheet of paper—his
own composition this time. 'Tatiana Ostapenko and Sergei
Malinin marriaged good ? ? ? Is it? This Indenture Wit-
nesseth true? Is it ? ? ? R.S.V.P. Very Importance."
Before Wilfred had time to achieve full understanding of
this last message, Pavel—
nervous lest the man should pre-
IJK 233 fli3
maturely shake his head—thrust the Russian history before
his guest, open at a picture of the wedding of Peter the
Great. "All same?" shouted Pavel, in a sweating frenzy of
suspense and mental effort, rapping his finger first on the
picture of the wedding and then on Wilfred's draft of the
deed.
"All same—all same/' said Wilfred, heartily, though still
uncertain what was required of him.
Pavel, more and more hopeful, yet still in an agony lest
some one should come in before understanding was com-
plete, positively prodded the deed, indicating—
so forcibly
that Wilfred's kneecap below was quite bruised—the four
signatures—Wilfred's own, Pavel's own, Seryozha's and
Tatiana's.
"Marriaged goody is it? All same church," he rasped into
Wilfred's ear, consulting his notes again. "Very importance
because this night they have sleeped ensemble like mar-
riaged. Now fornication not, is it?"
Wilfred now understood. His brain cleared and began
reviewing the results of this premature acceptance of his
drafted agreement. His eyes cleared and saw a pile of ten-yen
notes on the table. He woke up wholly. He read his draft
through carefully, his tongue, as well as his bright eyes, lean-
ing out of his head with a creator's eagerness.
His first thought was regret that these impetuous people
had not waited for him to show what he could really do in
the way of drawing up an agreement. This scribble was
nothing; it had a blot in the middle of one page; it did not
do Wilfred Chew, Esquire, of the Middle Temple, London,
any credit at all. Besides, added an afterthought, it was quite
worthless. There were no witnesses to the signatures, and
very little substance to the matter. Yet—what of it? These
were decent people, who were made happy by believing
themselves decently folded within the limits of the law.
Law-abiding people only too anxious to abide by even this
m 234 m
exiguous semblance of the law. Outlaws craving to be in.
Supposing Wilfred, as he thought loftily, annulled by a
sceptical word this marriage that he had accidentally made,
much disturbance of mind would result—and no advan-
tage. "Morally it is a real marriage," thought Wilfred. "And
it mustbe God's will, since Godhas not provided these poor
barbarians with their orthodox machinery for getting mar-
ried." He felt conscientiously that he was, in this instance,
an instrument of God's will. In fact, since the law, as repre-
sented by Wilfred, had more to do with the making of this
marriage than Heaven had, he felt himself to be in the
position of chief justice in this crown colony of Heaven. His
it was, not God's, to exercise, as it were, the discretion of the
court in this case. Reverend Mr. Oswald Fawcett would
surely be the last to wish quibbles of church or law to de-
stroy these innocent barbarian illusions. Supposing a baby
were to result from last night's naive precipitancy, would it
not be a misuse of Wilfred's supreme power to make the
poor little thing illegitimate by a careless word?
While Wilfred thought all these things, his eye dwelt
blankly on the pile of ten-yen notes on the table.
"Are all the parties concerned in the agreement prepared
to carry out the various undertakings named?" asked Wil-
fred, sternly.
"Schto?" asked the anxious Pavel, his chestnut eyes al-
most leaning out of their sockets. Perhaps, he thought, the
whole crux of the matter depends on these unknown words
that he is saying.
"Have all the signatories expressed their honest intention
of abiding by all the provisions of the indenture?"
"Schtor
Wilfred clicked in his throat. For a second he considered
tearing the silly old paper in half. Then he pointed to the
clauses that dealt with the money payment. Pavel's eyes,
like a thirsty proboscis, sucked in the information indicated.
ffl 235 M
Wilfred gave Pavel time to reabsorb the idea under exami-
nation, and then leaned over, took the pile of notes, and
counted out on to his own knee one hundred and fifty yen.
'^Horosho—ah?" yelled Wilfred.
"Hoiosho—hoiosho," replied Pavel in a rival bellow.
'Then in this case the bumaga is perfectly hoiosho," said
Wilfred, throwing himself with abandon backward on the
sofa, to show that the matter was settled.
"Hoiosho—
ah?" queried Pavel, making sure.
"HoTOsho, hoTOsho."
"Bumaga hoiosho—ah?"
"Hoiosho, hoiosho."
"HoToshor
The storm of sibilant uncertainty died down. Everything
was all right. Everything was safe. Wilfred and Pavel sat
and looked at each other, a little tired but with glorious
faces.
Then Pavel leapt to his feet and threw open the door to
let the world come in. "Breakfast—breakfast," he shouted
in Russian, clapping his hands like a kindly sultan summon-
ing slaves.
Varvara and Katya and the dog surged in, without rancor.
Tatiana and Seryozha were late. They came in, hand in
hand, as Pavel, Varvara and Wilfred began to eat. All three
of their seniors looked at them for a moment in an odd
silence.
Tatiana had the sense that they—two humble victims of
a strangeness—
were offering themselves tentatively to these
eyes. She often had this pitying sense that comers-in were
on approval, shrinking behind the transparent, hopefully
decorated, adjusted screen of their faces. "Will I do? This
is the best me I can show you. Will it do?" Egoists were
even more touching than altruists. Her father's precarious
challenge to criticism had often wrung her heart. Nowhere
she was—vulnerably visible herself—she who had been
UIJ 236 ftJjl
unconscious—bodiless—invisible all her life. Here she was
at the mercy of eyes, having dangerously taken body on her-
self through the big solid body of Seryozha beside her.
It was as though the old story of the magic cloak of in-
visibility had been reversed; by wrapping her water-clear
impersonality in this wide cloak of reality that Seryozha was,
she was seen—
seen—a woman at last—obliged to offer
herself for acceptance or rejection by the eyes of strangers
—obliged to ask humbly for tolerance, from eyes.
Andas she looked at Seryozha going shyly round the table
to his place, hitching up one shoulder awkwardly as though
one of his legs were heavier than the other, patting down
the brassy crest of hair on the crown of his head, she felt
almost as if she were in his body, protecting it from the cold
challenge of eyes—
as if she were with him inside his too
visible body which quailed, yet hoped for the best—which
preened itself, yet feared rebuff. She felt herself the true
traditional wife—helping him to strengthen his ramparts,
arming and encouraging the tender J inside that tough body.
And when Seryozha said to her father, 'Thank you, I
won't have any honey," Tatiana could almost have cried, so
suddenly obsessed was she by the thought of that I—alone
all its life till now—hoping for the best possible results
from its little notions of making itself charming—
or at
least inoffensive; trying to feel confident of victory in its
humble struggles to impress itself; keeping its body clean,
its nose wiped, its mind wistfully yet imperfectly adjusted
to the minds of others; walking in and out of the presence
of strangers, saying, "Will I do?" and then, "Did I pass?"
When Seryozha said, "I won't have any honey, thank you,"
she saw him clinging forlornly to his rights and prejudices,
daring to refuse honey, to like ham, to be different from
other people, presenting himself cautiously as an individual
to the round ruthless eve of her father.
ffl 237 flJJ
Seryozha, unaware of the pathetic picture he was present-
ing to his wife, ate a very hearty breakfast and felt better, in
spite of a shght spasm of indigestion. His father and mother
were on his mind; he beheved that he was pitying them, but
really he was homesick for them. How could he combine
the keeping of his promise to Varvara—
to stay at Mi-san
for a fortnight—with his determination to get home as
quickly as possible? And there was that money still to be
fetched from Isaev in Seoul. His life seemed to him now so
complicated that he sweated a little all the time. He gave
inarticulate consideration to a letter that he would write to
his mother—Dearest mamma, I am married to Tatiana
Pavlovna Ostapenko.. . . That wouldn't take long; he
knew how to spell all the words. In the meantime, he drew
Wilfred aside.
"My mamma and my papa, Mr. Chew, they thinks I
come back soon."
"Well, you will, will you not?"
"Nyet. Pavel Nicholaievitch speak meI wait here fourteen
day."
"Very hospitable, Fm sure."
"Da da da. But I speak him, Yes, I shall stop."
"Well, it is for you to say."
"Nyet. My papa and my mamma thinks I come back
more soon."
"Well really, my dear Saggay Saggayitch, I cannot grasp
your difficulty. It is impossible for you to be in two places
at once."
"Mostimpossible, indeed. Nu, if I shall wait here fourteen
day, then, after, I must go to Isaev to speak him to give me
my papa's money."
"Well, what of it? Thatwas whatyou came for, primarily,
was it not?"
"Yes indeed, very primarily. Yet yist too long time. My
fS& 238 fS^
papa and my mamma very sad. Fourteen day here. Three
four day Seoul. Ten day walking to Chi-tao-kou. Too long
time."
"Well, why not make a quick trip to Seoul today or to-
morrow, get your money and come back here?"
"But I speak Pavel Nicholaievitch and Varvara Alexeievna
most certain sure I wait here fourteen day."
"We seem to be arguing in a circle, my dear chap/' said
Wilfred, still anxious to be helpful, yet conscious of a dead-
lock.
"Mr. Chew, I give you my papa's paper. You go to Seoul
and speak Isaev give you my papa's money. So you bring
back to me this moneyand after fourteen day, we go home."
"With the greatest pleasure, mydear Saggay Saggayitch,"
said Wilfred Chew, immediately.
\w m
m/imNimmM
•Y*V*T*T«Y«Y T»T»Y»Y#Y«Y«
ym
CHAPTER TWELVE
"This is very kind of me/' thought Wilfred Chew, as he sat
in the Seoul-bound train. The train lurched through the
black world with an open-throated, gasping roar. '1 really
seem to be a kind of guardian angel to these Russians. . . .
What would they do without me?"
As he thought of the Reverend Oswald Fawcett> whohad
warned him against every sin except complacency, the hun-
dred and fifty yen that Ostapenko had given him seemed
to lie not exactly heavily but perceptibly on his bosom. The
money was a foreign body in his conscience, like a splinter of
shell in a soldier's flesh. "There is nothing wrong in being
paid for one's services," Wilfred replied to the shadow of
the Reverend Oswald Fawcett. Poor Wilfred! his conscience
was already a naturalised alien in his Chinese body. And
now must his Chinese lips turn traitor and serve this Wes-
leyan conscience? His brain—Chinese born—London
trained—sought a compromise. "Men are sometimes made
use of, surely, by God for His purposes. . . used, in fact,
as angels or heavenly messengers, in answer to the prayers
of unhappy people. Yet those men, so used, still have stom-
achs that must be filled—futures that must be provided
m 240 m
for. . . . Why, don't you remember, Mr. Fawcett? there
was a time when we prayed for more blankets for the school,
and that very afternoon, in walked a coolie with a present
of army blankets from the Dutch Consul. That gift was
none the less Heaven-sent because we had to tip the coolie
for bringing it. Money must pass—
even between angels—
especially when honestly earned. . . . What else is money
for? Money isn't always mammon—
it is sometimes just
simple food and lodging. To continue upon the earth at all,
we guardian angels to simple barbarians must be paid—
must be fed—must be kept alive. ... Of what use is a
dead guardian angel to any one?"
Wilfred, as a sort of challenge to the impassive ghost of
Mr. Fawcett, elaborated this heavenly-messenger idea, which
his mission training showed him in quite a literal aspect. An
angel was to him as concrete as, say, a duck-billed platibus;
he had been taught to believe in the actual existence of both,
though neither had, in fact, crossed his path. 'Terhaps,"
thought Wilfred, suddenly beginning to combine his mis-
sion-bred trustfulness with a sort of home-made mysticism,
"I am literally an instrument of Heaven, born exclusively
for that purpose, brought into the world to straighten out
the lives of these good Russians. How could you prove the
contrary? Perhaps the angel that came to the Virgin Mary
was an angel in the body of the local equivalent of a pre-
natal-care district nurse (no, Mr. Fawcett, it is not an ir-
reverent thought—an angel in such a manifestation would
be none the less an angel—why not?). For an angel to be
visible, a body is necessary, and a body, being a worldly gar-
ment, must have a worldly justification. A minister, who
lives, eats, is paid his salary, dies, rots away in the grave, you
say is God's representative in any community. . . how
then should God clothe His messengers—His materialized
answers to prayer—in any other than a human body? How
could those blankets have reached our school without a
m 241 m
coolie to carry them—probably a coolie who was looking
forward to his dinner. How could old Mr. Malinin receive
his money from Seoul, or acquire a beautiful heiress for a
daughter-in-law, without me? In all probability, many
prayers rose up to heaven at the same time, and combined
to elicit me, the common answer to all these prayers—old
Mr. Malinin's prayer for his money; his prayer to be cured
of his blindness (for the rubbing with putrefied fish is a
tried remedy and may yet be successful); young Saggay Sag-
gayitch's prayer to see the world; Mr. Ostapenko's prayer
that his daughter after seven failures might find a suitable
husband; Miss Ostapenko's prayer that the curse of un-
womanly coldness might be taken from her ... all these
prayers, probably, rose in one breath to the Throne, and God
sent one ingenious combined answer—
."
me.
. .
Wilfred threw himself back on the vibrating railway
cushions, defying the shadow of the Reverend Oswald
Fawcett to find a fallacy in this modern and lucid argu-
ment.
"And if I
—Wilfred Chew—
was born, educated in the
Wesleyan Academy, enabled to study law in the Middle
Temple, London, and be called to the Bar, simply to ac-
complish God's purposes for these poor helpless Russians—
if this was God's idea of a suitable education for His mes-
senger—shall I be ashamed of supporting myself by means
of the wits and the education that He has given me? Shall
I refuse fair payment—prostitute the advantages God gave
me—become a beggar? You will be saying next that I
should have refused the rather ample traveling expenses
Saggay Saggayitch handed to me on starting. Traveling ex-
penses are necessary, even to an angel—
if that angel hap-
pens to be traveling in human form on wheels. . . . Just so,
similarly, God meant me to receive this commission"—he
smacked the wad of notes on his bosom—
"for drawing up
the agreement and arranging the marriage—just as much
as He created me—an answer to prayer—in human form
and adorned me with education/'
There was no one else in that section of the compartment,
and Wilfred took out the wad of notes and began counting
them. The money, he was sure, was well earned; the notes
had a righteous texture against his finger tips; and yet, as he
ruffled them, he had a feeling that the shadow of the Rev-
erend Oswald Fawcett in front of him was counting some-
thing beyond the notes in Wilfred's hand—and counting
that something with a reproachful eye—counting the in-
tentions, the financial hopes of Wilfred—ghosts of notes
not yet paid. "And what I say about this money I have in
my hand," persisted Wilfred to the reproving shadow, "ap-
plies with equal reason and force to the commission I intend
to charge on the money I have been empowered to secure
in Seoul. A just commission is in no way open to criticism.
What is it but a dividend paid on that capital which we call
education? Yes, it is true that the people I am acting for are
ignorant people, incapable of checking my transactions.
. . . For that very reason I feel that the trust is sacred—
that I am a mouthpiece for babes and sucklings—that it is
for me alone to appraise—justly and temperately—the
value of myservices, and to reimburse myself with an honest
moderation. If I were to leave the amount of mycommission
to that old Mr. and Mrs. Malinin—the one so confused and
senile, the other so ardent and exaggerated—they would
almost certainly offer me far too much—probably the half
of their fortune. Even at that they would, definitely, gain
by their association with me. But no—
I will refuse every-
thing that the unthinking ardor of gratitude may inspire
them to oflfer me; I will turn away my face, kindly but
firmly, as a messenger of God should, from all extravagant
offers of reward. 'No—no,' I shall say, and nothing will
turn me from my determination. Now—
to enable me to
afford this perfectly correct attitude—what am I to do?
m 243 m
What but pay myself, on a logically worked out basis, my
exact commission on whatever I may get over and above
old Mr. Malinin's expectations—my exact commission—
and not a sen more. The trust of these innocent barbarians
in me is a challenge in itself; I would not betray it for all
the silver in the Bank of Chosen. I intend to secure, on their
behalf, as in honor bound by my divine trusteeship, every
sen that I can. I am perfectly aware that old Mr. Malinin
would be quite satisfied—quite unsuspicious—
if I returned
to him with the original two hundred yen plus perhaps
five and twenty yen as interest. He has no knowledge of the
workings of compound interest. Shall I content myself with
satisfying his innocent and humble hope? Athousand times
no. I will make a rich man of him—the comfortable
founder of a prosperous family. My errand shall be success-
ful beyond his wildest dreams. As an answerer of prayers I
will give good measure, pressed down and running over.
And who shall say that, for this useful service, I am not en-
titled to a fair percentage. . . purely as a defense against
the old man's extravagant gratitude? 'No, Mr. Malinin, no
—
I do not need a sen more than what I have earned. Keep
your money. Prosper righteously. Good-by.'... I shall
then withdraw like the heavenly messenger I truly am, leav-
ing behind me all prayers answered, all troubles smoothed
."
away.. .
He threw himself back in his seat again, licking his gold
tooth almost as though he were delicately showing the tip
of his tongue to the ghost of the Reverend Oswald Fawcett.
"Oh nonsense!" he thought. "Whyall this talk? After
all, I am Chinese. Commission is the very lifeblood of
China, yet Chinese are the most honest and trusted busi-
ness menin the world; the honesty of Chinese business men
is proverbial—
even in Bloomsbury I have heard talk of it
—
yet every Chinese business man takes his commission as
a matter of course."
Hescanned the ghost again, and still his expatriated heart
was not satisfied.
"Why, can't you see how pure my intentions are toward
the poor idiots? I like them—
I am genuinely fond of that
lumpy young Saggay Sagga}itch. I really do mean well, and
will do-well by them. . . . WTiy, look, I amtraveling second
class at this moment—not first. . . . Well, no, of course
I shan't exactly give back the difference—not in so many
coins—
yet traveling second in this way will allow me to
spend more in Seoul on my employer's behalf. This in itself
shows how disinterested I am. I know that I am sent by
God to help them. I have proof of it, as follows: I have re-
ceived direct promptings from Heaven. For instance, that
fish—
even while Saggay Saggayitch was in the water catch-
ing that fish, I suddenly felt quite clearly that I had already
dreamed that very scene; I knewat once that the heart, liver,
and gall of the fish were to be preserved as gifts from Heaven.
God sent that fish—having caused it to be miraculously
caught round the waist (a most exceptional method) by
Saggay Saggayitch, and I was warned in advance of the
miracle by means of a dream. Wliat does this prove? Does
it not prove that I am God's messenger to them? And not
only that; I am genuinely fond of them; I wouldn't do them
out of a sen. No, I wouldnt. . .
."
The first light of dawn gave a curious false emphasis to
various insignificant details in the compartment—
to in-
equalities in the stuffing of the cushions—
to spittoons—
to smears on the window-glass—
to dust and dreary orna-
mentation. The ghost of the Reverend Oswald Fawcett
faded from Wilfred's moral sight as the light grew stronger
and picked out more and more prosaically the details of his
surroundings. He leaned back, feeling justified and sophisti-
cated, and looked out of the window. Brown bat-wing vil-
lages, shadeless and lightless in the diffused drowned light of
m 245 m
dawn, clung to the miles of dry green and yellow land. The
first cooking-fires were being kindled in the clay stoves out-
side the cottage doors; smoke breathed in a cool blue haze
through roofs. Scarlet peppers, spread out to dry on the
roofs, looked almost grape-blue with the dew on them—
though when the sun should touch them they would wake
to a Christmasy vermilion. Mountains—their earth wine-
red as though clothed in heather—cut the intensifying line
of the horizon into a jagged zigzag. Out-of-doors always
seems more essentially out-of-doors at dawn—
not, as in the
busy afternoon, a mere extension of man's indoors. There
was that aloofness—unstained by humanity—about the
cold paling twilight of the land, that one sees in a wild ani-
mal's eyes.
Wilfred had replaced his well-earned money in his breast
pocket, but he still held upon his knee four papers that
armedhim for his errand. Now, by that same first ray of the
sun that lighted the eastern aspects of the western moun-
tains as though they were candles, he reread these papers, in
order to clarify his anticipation of the next few busy hours.
The first paper was a Power of Attorney signed by Old
Sergei in favor of Seryozha. It had been drawn up by Wil-
fred himself from memory. Wilfred, of course, had only a
haughty barrister's recollection of such a pettifogging paper
as a Power of Attorney, yet, as he ran his eye over it, he
congratulated himself on having composed an impressive
echo of the real thing.
Know All Men by these presents that I Sergei Dmitrivitch
Malinin of Chi-tao-kou retail merchant Do Hereby Constitute
and Appoint my son Sergei Sergeievitch Malinin of Chi-tao-kou
timbervvorker my tme and lawful Attorney for the purposes
hereinafter expressed that is to say In my name to receive the
moneys deposited by mewith Gavril Hitch Isaev of Seoul hotel-
ffl 246 aa
keeper in July one thousand nine hundred and eighteen for in-
vestment in his business namely two hundred yen and interest
accruing thereto and to give an effectual receipt therefor. And
I hereby declare that this Power of Attorney shall be inevoca-
ble for Twelve Calendar Months from the date hereof.
In Witness whereof I ha\e hereunto set my hand and seal
this fourteenth day of September One thousand nine hundred
and t\vent\' eight. Signed Sealed and Deli\ered by the abo\e-
named Sergei Dmitri\'itch Malinin in the presence of Anna
SemionoMia Malinina of Chi-tao-kou housewife.
Of the other papers, one was a note in Russian from Pavel
Ostapenko to Ga\Til Hitch Isaev, introducing W^ilfred as the
trusted friend, legal adWser, and man of affairs of PaveFs
cousin, Sergei Dmitrivitch Malinin, explaining young Ser-
yozha's non-appearance in Seoul, in\iting Isaev to come to
Mi-san for a few days and drink the health of Pa\'ers newly
married daughter, and cordially hoping that the news from
Isaev*s tra\ eling son, Pet\'a, was good.
The third paper was wxitten in English by Wilfred and
signed by Ser\ozha. It ran:
De-vr Mr. Is-VEv. Since it is impossible, for reasons explained
by my father-in-law Mr. Ostapenko, for me to proceed to Seoul
in person to discuss with you the final settlement of the trans-
action that took place between you and my father in July, 1918,
I am placing my Power of Attorne}' in the hands of my father's
friend and legal adnser Mr. ^^'ilf^ed Chew of the Middle
Temple, London, and should be much obliged if you would
consider him as my father's agent in my stead, and either place
in his hands the two hundred yen which you most kindly in-
vested for my father on his last visit to Seoul and the interest
accumulated during the intenal, or else (and this would give
me much pleasure) come yourself to Mi-san thus killing two
birds in one bush, namely settling the financial transaction in
person and enjo\ing my father-in-law's unstinted hospitality.
m 247 m
The fourth paper was a greasy and laconic memorandum
of receipt in Russian. Anna had translated it for Wilfred as
simply, "Received from Sergei Dmitrivitch Malinin on
July 12, 1918, two hundred yen for safe keeping. Gavril
Hitch Isaev."
Seoul looked excited and glittering in the morning light.
The sight of large, cfEcient-looking buildings and large
efficient-looking English and American tourists made Wil-
fred strut, feeling himself a man of the world returned at
last to his world.
He found his way, without difficulty, in a rickisha to the
Isaevs' hotel, a transformed Japanese inn. Like all Japanese
houses lived in by non-Japanese, it had lost its light, kite-like
look—
it was an architectural bird with clipped wings. Wil-
fred strolled up the steps, an upslanting cigarette in his
mouth, and found Isaev in the hall, reading a Russian news-
paper.
It was Wilfred's misfortune always to remember people
much better than they remembered him. He remembered
Isaev as a human frog, a squatting pyramidal person with a
moist shiny skin, and an immense slit-like mouth always
gasping obscurely for air. Olga, Isaev's wife, was not present,
yet Wilfred remembered her with an equal exactness—
a
padded person, plump breasts padding her neat dress, secret
cushions padding her neat hair, puffed smiles padding her
cheeks. On her devolved all the acquiescences that Isaev
never uttered; his attitude was a chronic No and hers a
constant Yes. Wilfred had counted on laying his business
before man and wife together. To find only Isaev present
set him back a little, but he began with his usual affability,
"We have met before, Mr. Isaev. My name is Chew, Wil-
fred Chew, barrister, of the Middle Temple, London. I hope
I am fortunate enough to find a room disengaged once
more in your comfortable hotel."
Isaev nodded uncertainly. All Chinese looked alike to
fiU 248 £i2i3
him. His spectacles were made of very thick convex glass.
He had a very thick and conspicuously shiny face; every-
thing about him was thick and shiny. Attention was called
to his surface in every way. Somehow Isaev could scarcely
be imagined as hollow like other people; there could hardly
be room for a brain between the thick walls of that skull,
or space in that square inflexible breast for a heart to bound
or flutter. His nose was a simple mass of shiny flesh, pierced
by only the smallest and most rudimentary nostrils. He
held his head back to look at Wilfred over his newspaper,
under his spectacles, and across his wide sallow polished
cheek-bones.
"We have a room," he said in English. "'How long for?"
"I have business in Seoul that should not keep me long.
Mybusiness, as a matter of fact, Mr. Isaev, is with you. Can
you spare me half an hour now? Excellent. Wehave, as I
mentioned above, met before. ... I was in Seoul only a
few weeks ago, acting as secretary-companion to an English
baronet. Sir Theo Mustard—
you may have heard of him.
However, in order to give our acquaintanceship a more per-
sonal flavor, allow me to hand you this note—
a letter of
introduction from Mr. Pavel Ostapenko of Mi-san."
Isaev took the letter with distaste and, holding his head
up and the letter down, read it across the intervening area
of his face.
"I hates Pavel Ostapenko," he said, simply, when he had
finished it.
"Really!" exclaimed Wilfred, pleasantly. "Well, I can
understand that there might be room for more than one
opinion about his peculiar personality. He is a man of very
strong character and such men commonly make a strong
impression one way or the other. However, his letter will at
least show you that I am no man of straw, being recom-
mended by a substantial member of the community such
m 249 ffl
as Mr. Ostapenko, you will admit, is, though his personality
"
may not have a universal app
"His daughter is a bitch/' said Isaev in the same flat re-
mote voice.
"Well well/' said Wilfred, still courageously bright. "As
to that, again, there might be a difference of opinion be-
tween friends on the subject of Miss Ostapenko, who is,
like her father, an individuality both marked and"
"She is a bitch."
"You really think so? Well, your decided and original
views on Miss Ostapenko's charm will no doubt add interest
to the news I believe Mr. Ostapenko gave you in his letter.
Miss Ostapenko was married only two days ago to myyoung
friend Saggay Saggayitch Malinin. The name Malinin is, I
believe, famil"
"This bitch treated myson very bad," said Isaev.
"Indeed I am deeply sorry to hear it, my dear sir," said
the tireless Wilfred. "I remember hearing Mr. Ostapenko
describing your son as a particularly fine young man. He is,
I am sure, a credit to you, and though he may temporarily
have fallen a victim to what is called in London 'Cupid's
"
darts' he will
"Because of this bitch," said Isaev, "my son have joined
the Chinese army."
"Indeed! Well, you know, boys will be boys. Your son
is not the first fine young man who has turned from disap-
pointed love to a military career, and—mark you—made
good.. . . The soldier's profession is, after all, considered
an honorable one, especially in your country, and I have no
doubt that your son will distinguish himself and rapidly
gain promotion. Perhaps, indeed, he will some day be able
to look back with self-congratulation on his association with
"
the Ostap
"He is losed/' said Isaev. "Wehave losed our son. From
m 250 m
the Chinese army Russians never come back. She is a bitch.
The whole Ostapenko family is a bitch."
"Ah/' said Wilfred. He clicked in his throat and a bafHed
tragic expression filled his face. Then, like a railway engine
that has bumped against buffers, he drew several breaths
and, having shunted himself out of this unpromising siding,
started briskly off again on a new line.
"But this is all by the way. Perhaps I had better come
to the business which brought me here. I will take a chair,
if I may. Howdelightfully the morning sun illuminates this
room! I referred just now to young Saggay Saggayitch
Malinin. His name—
or rather his father's name—
is, I
believe, familiar to you."
"Never in mylife."
"It will occur to you in a minute, I am sure, when I re-
call the circumstances. A busy man, I know, cannot afford
to overstock his memory with unnecessary details. This Sag-
gay Dmitrivitch Malinin, now a retail merchant in Chi-tao-
kou, Manchuria, once paid a visit to you a long time ago—
ten years ago, to be exact, in July, 1918."
Isaev was silent. Language had been given to him for the
purpose of obstructing his fellow-men—not cooperating
with them.
"As I think I have already mentioned, Mr. Isaev, I am a
barrister, of the Middle Temple, London. Mr. Malinin has
constituted me his man of affairs. Having, by my advice,
executed a Power of Attorney in favor of his son, Mr.
Malinin commissioned me to accompany this son to Seoul
in the capacity of legal adviser—since young Saggay Sag-
gayitch has had no experience in business matters—in order
that I might make everything clear to you, and satisfy you
as to the details and authenticity of his business with you.
I hope I make myself clear?"
There was a long silence.
"I hope, Mr. Isaev, that you take my meaning."
flJJ 251 M
"I not understand one word what you speak/' said Isaev,
looking at him craftily.
Wilfred suddenly became wholeheartedly discouraged.
The language bar again. He had no doubt whatever of his
capacity to achieve anything at all that a fluent use of the
English language could bring about. But remove words from
a talker and where is he? This stopping of ears, by means
of incompatibility of language, against a talker, is like the
stopping of earths against a homecoming hunted fox.
Luckily, at this momenta half-seen piece of furniture, up-
holstered in striped linen, just inside an inner doorway, sud-
denly quivered, became human, advanced toward them and
turned into Mrs. Isaev. She said something hastily in Rus-
sian to her husband and then remarked cheerfully in English
to Wilfred: "Ah—
you were here before, sta}dng with us.
Wait—
I remember your name—Mr. Chew, is it not? We
are glad of seeing you again, Mr. Chew."
Wilfred, although he realized she had been listening and
might have gleaned this information from what had been
said, preferred to feel that he had made an enduring impres-
sion during his last visit. "A charming woman," he thought,
building up her, as we all do, from that single flattering as-
pect of her that faced himself.
Just as a palaeontologist builds up a whole mountainous
prehistoric beast from one bone, so we reconstruct our
neighbors from a mere glimpse of a ghost. Weare doomed
to live among ghosts just as surely as we are doomed to see
through our own eyes only. All are ghosts—these lovers—
these enemies—these passers-by.. . . We see them
through the distorting lens of vanity. We traduce our
neighbors by the senseless names of friends—of enemies;
we divorce them from their realities, bereave them of body,
cut them off from their destinations and starting-places,
make homeless ghosts of them. If they love us, they are
darling ghosts to us; if they injure us, they are bogeys. Yet
fiiil 252 (JJJ
all the time something that is not a ghost lives at home—
far from our sight—dark, changeless men and women
built of blood and bone and burning egoism, creatures that
neither love us nor hate us
—
nor even know our names—
things that are, not things that are seen by us to be.
Wilfred lived his life largely backwards. The scenes his
optimism anticipated glowed so gloriously, sparkled with
so flattering a success, that the reality was almost always a
diminishing, an anticlimax, a dim and inexact rendering of
the bright foreseen event—like the creation of a defective
memory, or like the telling of a good story by one who has
forgotten the point.
This, the entrance of the acquiescent Isaeva, was the point
at which the curtain rose on a scene that Wilfred had al-
ready rehearsed on the stage of his hopeful fancy. There
had been nothing wrong with the rehearsals; here was the
first public performance. Wilfred's forward-hearing ear could
hear his own voice reasonably explaining the circumstances
of his mission—Old Sergei's loan and his wish for its re-
turn; he could hear Isaev's voice grunting agreement,
Isae\'a's voice confirming and gracing the accord. Wilfred
could never anticipate counter-arguments to his own logic;
it was too faultless. He was not, therefore, surprised to hear
the expected sound of success beginning—
a coo of agree-
ment from Olga Isaeva in reply to a grunt in Russian from
her husband.
"Of course we remember Sergei Dmitrivitch Malinin
ver\^ good," she said in English. "My husband has not at first
understanded your pronouncing of the name. Sergei Dmitri-
vitch—how good did he behave to us!" It was almost im-
possible for Olga to speak without a smile, it seemed. "My
husband knows business very good, but he speak English
not so good. I can help you perhaps with my so poor
English. You speak English so very good yourself."
"It is no merit," beamed Wilfred. "I have been educated
at the Wesle}'an Academy in Yueh-lai-chou. I have also
studied law for many years in London, and was called to the
Bar there. I earn- papers from Mr. S. D. Malinin which I
should like to bring to the notice of Mr. Isaev and yourself.
I am sure you will remember that, ten years ago, when
Mr. S. D. Malinin visited Seoul last, Mr. Isaev was so kind
as to take charge of two hundred yen which he undertook
to invest for Mr. Malinin in whatever way he thought fit.
This was because Mr. Malinin did not think it safe to carry
his money in cash back to Chi-tao-kou (where there are no
banking facilities), the times being then troublous."
The couple murmured together in Russian for a moment,
the wife's face still armored by a smile and the husband's by
flat stupidity.
"My husband remembers this time quite good, Mr.
Chew, but it was not quite as you think, he says. Sergei
Dmitri\"itch, who has been the brother of my husband's
oldest friend in \'ladi\-ostok, has gived us this sum—about
two hundred yens—in gratitude for my husband's friend-
ship with Mr. Malinin's brother who has died. When Sergei
Dmitrivitch comes here we are very poor—
our life is not
good—we have runned away from the Bolsheviks—we
have nothing. Weli\'e in a small room here in Seoul and we
say, 'WTiat to do—how to live?' Then Sergei Dmitrivitch
says, Tou shall make a hotel. I shall give you two hundred
yens because you are friends of my brother who has died.
You shall borrow from the bank. Your hotel shall be good;
you, Gavril Hitch, are good \nth business—
you, Olga
Ivanovna, can cook good. Your hotel shall therefore be al-
together good.' Oi! it was goodness that caused the good
Sergei Dmitrivitch to give us this money. It has been the
beginning of our hope."
'It was certainly the act of a friend," agreed ^^'ilfred, a
slight shadow crossing his face as he heard this unrehearsed
interpolation. "Nothing in this life is more encouraging than
m 254 m
the way in which—
if we live Christian hves—
our friends
come fonvard when we are in trouble and reward us for
our past good deeds by trusting in our schemes sufficiently
to invest in them. Without such friends, what should we
do? How true is the Gospel saying, 'It is better to give than
to receive/ Yet in this case, Air. Malinin saw that it was
better still to invest than to give—
since, in investing, one
enjoys the combined pleasures of giving and receiving. His
timely investment in your future placed your delightful
hotel on its feet or rather foundations. I am very glad that
you so deeply appreciate the friendliness and faith that he
expressed in your business soundness by placing his savings
in your care. This friendly spirit makes business so much
easier. His was certainly a Christian act, and, since we are
all Christians here—Greek Orthodox being no doubt but
another expression of similar great truths to the Wesleyan
faith in which I was brought up—
I am sure you will be
sorry to hear that Mr. S. D. Malinin, who was such a good
friend to you in time of need, is now in very poor circum-
stances himself. He is a victim of blindness, and also of the
local unrest in Chi-tao-kou which has caused his shop to be
looted and his business most seriously affected. In fact, he
has scarcely a bean, and it is for this reason that he is obliged
to employ me in order to withdraw from your business the
capital he invested in it ten years ago, together with interest
accruing to same. Up to now he has been more than satis-
fied to leave the sum accumulating, at compound interest,
in your competent hands. A sum of money—
I see by this
little ready-reckoner of compound interest which I bought
at a money-changer's on my way here from the station—
doubles itself in ten years. Mr. Malinin's capital, therefore,
must by nowamount to over four hundred yen."
'*It is a mistake," said Olga, her smile becoming a little
fixed, as though there were an invisible clamp at each end
ffi -35 ffl
of her mouth. "Sergei Dmitrivitch, a so good man, must
not wish to take away his good gift from us/'
"Mrs. Isaew the mistake—
a quite unimportant one
among friends, but one that needs to be rectified at once—
is on your side. I have here a paper, signed by your husband
and given to Mr. Mahnin, acknowledging the receipt of the
money 'for safe keeping.' Your husband will remember sign-
ing this, I am sure. Xo one would sign such a paper in ac-
knowledgment of a mere gift."
Olga referred this to her husband in Russian, and, since
he did not reply, she understood that he could not deny the
authority of the receipt.
"MayI please see this paper?" she said, charmingly. "You
explain all so ver\- good, Mr. Chew, yet it is good also to
see, in order to understand yet more good."
\\'ilfred spread the crumpled ten-year-old piece of paper
on the table, pinning it down with a delicate finger and
thumb, since, even among smiles and Christians, a man of
law is always prepared for the worst.
"Ai—two hundred yens—good—good," she cooed,
vaguely, as she leaned over the paper. Her fingers made a
curious snarling gesture towards it which surprised Wilfred.
"A charming and sensible woman," he thought, "but a little
ner\-ous."
Isaev got up hea\ily and walked with a straddling gait
across the room to look. The receipt was just as he remem-
bered—just as he feared.
"Two hundred yens... to keep safe . .
." he sighed
after a long silence, during which he returned to his chair.
The clumsy impersonal settling of his wide buttocks in his
chair looked as though some solid shiny Buddha in a large
in\isible grasp were being balanced on its pedestal again.
*Two hundred yens. .
." repeated Olga, turning her
smile upon Wilfred again after a murmured word or two
ffl 256 iJiJJ
with her husband. "Well, perhaps we have make little mis-
take about the good gift—we have thought Sergei Dmitri-
vitch a so good friend; he has said, 'It is a gift/ and we
could not believe he shall ask to take away his gift. Now we
understand. This is not friendship—
to give a gift and then
to take away. It has not been love or gratefulness. It has been
business. Our mistake has been because we have loved
Sergei Dmitrivitch."
'It was the beginning of your prosperity, my dear Mrs.
Isaev/' said Wilfred, throwing his hands apart and looking
round as though to reintroduce her to all the family pos-
sessions in sight—the spittoons, the ornate buffet crowded
with bright bottles, the pots of ferns, the wobbly wicker
tables, the blackwood chairs, the posters of the South Man-
churian Railway and the British American Tobacco Com-
pany on the walls. . . . "What more could a friend do than
help you to reach this luxury?"
"To say this is not good, Mr. Chew," said Olga archly.
"We have not luxury. We are poor. Yet my husband will,
perhaps, when he is able to do without so much money,
send two hundredyens to Chi-tao-kou, if Sergei Dmitrivitch,
poor man, is now not in good position. Perhaps next year
we shall try to afford to do this."
Wilfred, by some freak in the angles of two mirrors in
the room, had just caught sight of his own neat seated form
in profile. Some of us, when we do this, have the feeling
that we have caught ourselves out, that we have accidentally
trespassed behind our own vanity. Not so Wilfred. He never
caught himself out. All that he saw in that reflected Wilfred
Chew who sat over there unconscious, as it were, of being
looked at, pleased and encouraged him, buttressed him in his
confidence. English clothes—
a neat auburn tie just show-
ing under the profile of the round chin—English Panama
hat held in a refined hand upon the knee—English words
parting those superior smiling lips—in that encouraging
l!lll3 257 fiJl
mirror Wilfred saw before him truly an angel on a mission
of guardianship, a success among failures, a water-lily among
frogs—
all, in fact, that he hoped to be.
"Mr. and Mrs. Isaev," he said, in a rather sharper voice,
"there is no use in this beating about of birds in the bush.
I speak now as Mr. S. D. Malinin's man of business. If you
will think again, you will see that this is not a matter of two
hundred yen to be sent in charitableness, when it can be
spared, to a poor chap in China. This is a matter of the im-
mediate withdrawal of a certain sum of money, Mr. S. D.
Malinin's capital, from your thriving business, together with
the interest that has accumulated in ten years. You have
used this money, successfully and skillfully, in the building
up of your business, but it is not your moneyand never was.
It is perfectly easy for me to prove that hitherto there has
been no consideration given in return for Mr. Malinin's two
hundred yen. It was not a gift, and was never mistaken for a
gift—the terms of the receipt preclude that. Therefore it
was an investment on which, though dividends have been
earned, none have as yet been paid, and none demanded up
till now. Here is this little book on compound interest
which I mentioned before. According to that, since the
time expired since the investment was made is just three
months over ten years, the sum in question should now
amount to four hundred and nine yen sixty-five sen. In the
name of Mr. S. D. Malinin, therefore, and of his son, Mr.
S. S. Malinin, who holds his Power of Attorney, I demand
the immediate return of this money—namely, four hun-
dred and nine yen sixty-five sen. There is no matter of
opinion—nothing good-natured or bad-natured—this is
simply a business matter, and we are business men and
woman who know that what must be must, and what
doesn't want to be can be made to be."
Both Isaevs looked at Wilfred astounded, Olga's amiable
mouth dropping open and her husband's grim slit welded
ffl 258 ffl
more tightly shut. From now on, a curious contradiction
began to make itself felt—that Olga's radiant acquiescence
somehow obstructed settlement, while Isaev's superficial in-
transigeance had the effect of advancing matters.
'Tou are a so good man, Mr. Chew," said Olga. "I know
you will not be angr}- when I tell you how much you mis-
take. Weare not prosperitous. We are full of misfortunes.
That fire in our kitchen last year—
oi! how misfortunate.
W'e ha\e losed three hundred yens' worth of our kitchen
properties—
saucepan, boiler, dishes, ice-box—
all losed.
Truly this is Sergei Dmitrivitch's money that is losed. . . .
WTien he has given the money, he has said, 'This two hun-
dred yens \nll pay your kitchen properties.. . J Now
kitchen is burnt—Sergei Dmitrivitch's money is losed. Poor
Isaev—
poor Malinin—
it is trulv misfortunate for
both. ..."
Wilfred smiled a little insolently as he sat leaning for-
ward, swaying his hat between his knees with his right hand,
like a snake-charmer at work. He made no reply to Olga's
appeal. "A pleasant enough woman/' he thought, "but
rather a fool."
Olga rose from the arm of her husband's chair and fetched
three glasses and a bottle of port wine. "Mr. Chew, you must
please arrange this matter more good for us. You are our
friend, too—
see, now, vou will drink with us. Myhusband
cannot give this large number of yens—
even if enemy puts
him in prison, he cannot give. But you are not enemy—
you are friend. I drink—Za V^ashe zdoro\Te—
I drink to
vou. It is business of lawyer and friend to arrange matters
for his friends."
'A\'ell, well," laughed Wilfred, a little self-consciously.
"I admit that the few odd yen and sen make the business a
little pett}'. Mr. Malinin has given me cart blaunch (blank
card) in the matter, and I should feel justified, I dare say, in
accepting on his behalf the round sum—four hundred yen.
m 259 ffl
Mind you, in a court of law I could easily establish a claim
for the full amount—but this is not a court of law, it is
simply a business matter discussed between two friendly
parties who have no wish to injure each other by the bloody
chopping off of a legal pound of flesh like Shakespeare."
The Isaevs started nervously at this sudden change to the
butcher's vocabulary. They watched his mesmeric swinging
hat.
'Tour hundred yens not," said Isaev, after a moment.
"Where is Sergei Sergeievitch?" cooed Olga. "Did you
not speak that he has come with? I am sure he is good friend
like his father—like his uncle. . . . He will ask you, Mr.
Chew, to arrange this matter more good for poor us. Why
is he not here?"
"As to that," said Wilfred, buoyantly, "nothing can be
easier to explain. Here is his letter. He is at Mi-San, having
been married on Thursday, and hopes you will come and
attend the subsequent festivities."
"Married to Tatiana Pavlovna," said Isaev. "The bitch."
Olga's white teeth showed in a widening smile. "Then
he is married to a not good girl, Mr. Chew. Because of
Tatiana Pavlovna our son is now not good boy—
gone away
from us
—soldier in Chinese army. Surely Mr. Chew, you
shall not ask us to help with our moneys to pay for this
marriage—
to help a not good girl who has behaved not
good to our son—that she may have a husband." Olga
laughed, an open-throated laugh as though she had been
outlining a delightful program. "Must our family's money
help Tatiana Pavlovna who has harmed our family? Surely,
Mr. Chew, you are too good and too cle\er a man to say
this."
"To begin with," said Wilfred. "It is not your family's
money. It is Mr. Malinin's. To continue with, even if it
were a fact that the money might help toward Saggay Sag-
gayitch's wedding expenses, you should surely be the last to
JJfi 260 jJiJJ
complain. Surely your dearest wish should be to hear of the
marriage of this young lady you do not like, and her de-
parture from Korea. Miss Ostapenko, having become Mrs.
S. S. Malinin and taken up her residence in Manchuria—
in a remote and inaccessible village, Chi-tao-kou—what
then prevents your son from returning to his home? He
went away to escape her—he will return once she is re-
moved."
'Tetya return?" said Olga, putting her knuckles to her
mouth with an incredulous gesture.
"Without a doubt. She has been a rose in his flesh. Or, as
the proverb says, a rose between two thorns—
one thorn
being removed, he turns to the other. . .
."
Once more the exuberance of his vocabulary baffled his
hearers. Abutcher at one moment—
a botanist the next—
and yet, all the time, a lawyer really. Still, what he had just
said made a great impression. It was a fact that Petya had
said that Korea was not large enough to hold himself and
Tatiana Pavlo\'na. Emptiedof Tatiana, presumably, it would
be just the right size for their son.
Isaev reread Ostapcnko*s letter and, with the murmured
help of his wife, Seryozha's English note. Olga sat upon the
arm of his chair, her round cheek leaning toward his sparse
hair. Wilfred walked over to show them the Power of At-
torney. Their three heads bent together and they looked
like an affectionate family group. The Isaevs could make
nothing of the Power of Attorney, and still less after Wil-
fred had explained it. Isaev now realized that he was going
to pay that money—
or most of it. His slow brain was like
a ship that does not answer readily to the helm, but which,
when the continued insistence of the helmsman's hand af-
fects her course at last, applies herself with an obstinate and
heavy exaggeration to the new direction. Isaev's mind was
obsessed now by the necessity for haste—by the fact that
m 261 ffl
the bank would close early on Saturday. Only by going to
the bank soon would he be able to conclude this tiresome
necessity for talk and thought, and be left in peace to finish
this Harbin newspaper account of a delicious scandal in the
family of an ex-general.
Olga also knew now that the money must be paid, and
she could scarcely endure the knowledge without screaming.
Underneath this comfortable and well-filled outer woman
was a straining, insatiable emptiness—
a sort of spiritual
sucking in, like the inhaling draught at the mouth of a sea
cave. Olga had never given a gift or consented to a surrender
in her life. Her charming and gentle eyes—always alert be-
hind their charm—
wove a kind of web about her as she
walked the world—
a web into which a flying miscellany
blundered—in which nothing came amiss—and from
which nothing ever escaped. Nothing ever went out of her
predacious heart or hands. Even her love for her son, her
tolerance of her husband, were predatory. Unswerving and
ravenous purpose had arranged her face in those attractive
and receptive contours, just as nature gi\'es some tropical
flowers a sensuous yet implacable appeal that lures insects
into their trap. All Olga's cupboards were filled with a great
treasure of rubbish; her heart was stored with accepted gifts
—willingly or unwillingly gi\'en, but never returned and
never paid for. Nothing came amiss—
a bribe, a compli-
ment, an act of reluctant obedience, a gift of money, a gift
of old newspapers, a declaration of love, a couple of cellu-
loid hairpins left behind in a drawer by a guest.. . . She
went through her cupboards by day, thinking, mine—mine
—mine; she went through her heart by night, still think-
ing, mine—mine. . . . And every time her eyes rested on
her ugly husband, she saw him as a fixture in her house, a
symbol of property. She saw his hand as an extra hand of
hers—
a hand that must, on her behalf, receive money from
fS^ 262 513
strangers, carry that money to the bank, and push it over
the counter into safety—but never write a check unless
that check were written to earn more money.
And now, to think of something labeled mine suddenly
changing its label to }'Ours—
to think of that cramped
auxiliar}- hand of hers forced to detach two or three hun-
dred yen from the darling accumulation, to receive nothing
in return except a dirty little forgotten slip of paper, made
Olga's heart swell with helpless fury. Yet still her smile
corked up the ferment within her.
'1 could give," said Isaev, slowly, "one hundred and fifty
yens today and, after not many months, perhaps, a hundred
other yens. More than two hundred and fifty yens not."
These words hardly seemed to Wilfred to make sense at
all. Forgetting for a moment that he was a heavenly mes-
senger, he wondered how the old frog could not under-
stand that eventual repayment was not—from Wilfred's
point of view—repayment at all; that money handed over
to the Malinins when Wilfred should be not there but in
Shanghai, perhaps—London, perhaps—Timbuctoo, per-
haps—might just as well be peanut-shells, for all the good
it would do to the principal in the case
—Wilfred Chew.
"My dear Mr. Isaev," said Wilfred, licking his gold tooth
between puckered lips, 'let us talk sense, please. You are
not now buying a pianola on the instalment plan; you are re-
turning to an investor his capital, with the interest due. Due,
I repeat, that is to say, to be paid now. It is not a matter of
next year or some time. Here I have a little piece of paper
which it is to your interest to redeem. The moment my
client's money is in myhands I give you this piece of paper.
You burn it. You are free of debt. You snap your fingers on
the nose of the world. If you do not choose to hand over the
money, I replace the little piece of paper in my pocket and
have recourse to the law. I am a lawyer, your friend as well
as Mr. Malinin's, and I assure you that you will have to pay
flJJ 263 tS^
in the end. Well, why not now? Why this undignified
haggling? As I said before, Mr. Malinin would adjust his
convenience to yours to the point of suggesting a round
sum—four hundred yen—instead of his exact rights. This
sum I should take the responsibility of accepting on his be-
"
half, but
—
'7 should—
I advise—
I accept
" Olga archly mimicked
him. Just as the work of a camera is, some think, a glance
from the evil eye, so this sweet vehement parody of Wil-
fred's voice seemed like the subtle curse of an evil tongue.
"Mr. Chew, it is not our friend Sergei Dmitrivitch which
speaks; it is you; it is you that wish to take the money from
poor us; it is you that speaks—that has power to arrange
how much. Sergei Dmitrivitch is many far miles away from
"
us
Isaev interrupted her; "Da-da-da, Olga, he speaks. Why
should he not speak? Heis friend of Sergei Dmitrivitch—he
speaks for him. Sergei Dmitrivitch is our friend. I hope then
Mr. Chew will be so kind to be our friend, too. Mr. Chew,
please think—like our friend—like Sergei Dmitrivitch's
friend—how this matter can be finished. I treat you like
friend. You are myguest here—my friend. As long as you
stay here—two day—three day—
I charge nothing. You
are a friend."
"It is most hospitable of you," said Wilfred, rather frost-
ily. "But on second thoughts, when we have settled this
business I think I will not stay in Seoul. If we can reach the
bank before it closes, I feel I ought to take tonight's train
back to Mi-san."
Isaev's face was quite animated now. He was like a pyra-
mid tipped with sunrise.
"Well, whether yes or no, I invite you like friend. If you
speak no, still remember my hospitality has money value
and what I offer to friend I do not take back. One week in
myhotel I offer—
one week, I think, twenty-five yens. See,
ftiA 264 tS&
I make you myguest if you go away—
if you stay—
it is all
the same—
you are my guest and friend." He laid twenty-
five yen on the table beside him. "We shall better finish
this matter now because the bank will shut door. Did you
speak two hundred and seventy-five yens?"
"My dear Mr. Isaev, I did not. On the contrary. You mis-
heard me. I may have mentioned the sum of three hundred
and seventy-five yen. This would I think be a reasonable
compromise."
"Oi-oi! Mr. Chew—remember how rich Sergei Dmitri-
vitch will be soon; he has nowver}^ rich son, married to that
bitch. Plenty money—
I think Pavel Nicholaievitch pay
plenty money to have his daughter married at last. Sergei
Dmitrivitch—now so rich—will not be made angry by
little matters. Fifty yen more—
fifty yen less—
it is nothing
to a man whose daughter is rich bitch. I also am business
man—
I am not made angry by small matters. If you come
to bank now, I give you three hundred and twenty-five yens
—thus all are glad—
all are still friends."
Isaev got up. Wilfred got up. Olga remained sitting on
the arm of Isaev's chair, her fine eyes fixed on the two ten-
yen notes and the five-yen note on the table. Wilfred, his
affectedly wandering attention having been recalled by a
murmur from Isaev, picked up these notes with a polite em-
barrassed laugh and, after flipping them about in the air for
a moment to show that they were entirely irrelevant—in
fact, nothing at all—put them in his pocket. Olga's eyes
were thus released from their spell. She looked wildly round
the room for a minute and then followed the two men to
the door.
"Are you also coming to the bank with us, Mrs. Isaev?"
asked Wilfred, cheerfully. "It is indeed a fine morning for
a little constitutional (as we call a walk in London)."
Olga gave a vague laugh and followed them into the
street.
£ll3 265 ffl
Wilfred and Isaev walked side by side, Olga a dozen paces
behind. She looked intent, like a spaniel scenting game—
she was following the scent of receding money.
'1 still hope/' said Wilfred, "to persuade you to accept
the invitation of Mr. Ostapenko and Saggay Saggayitch to
return with me to Mi-san and take part in the marriage re-
joicings—and to satisfy yourself by eye that the dangerous
young lady. Miss Ostapenko, is securely spliced."
Isaev made no reply. The necessity for affability was over.
He walked with an effort, heaving his heavy body, breathing
asthmatically—not only through his mouth and nose, but
also, apparently, through his goggling eyes. Bicyclists, the
most insidious danger to life in the Japanese Empire, slith-
ered and glittered round him like eels round a rock. As he
waddled across the wide shadow of one of the old serene
squat gateways of Seoul, one could imagine that just so
would the gateway itself advance behind its massive shadow,
should those great red plaster bow-legged flanks be spurred
with life.
The door of the bank was a triumphal arch for Wilfred.
He was genuinely delighted to have secured a reasonable
sum of money for that innocent old dotard, Sergei Malinin.
Hewas pleased to have done well for himself, too—twenty-
five yen here, a hundred and fifty yen on the marriage, his
expenses during these weeks, and fifty sen a day, and finally
the promised ten per cent on the unexpected hundred and
twenty-five yen he should bring back. Over two hundred yen
altogether—and all earned in a perfectly correct Wesleyan
manner, thought Wilfred, looking defiantly right and left
along the hygienic perspectives of the bank. And he saw,
drooping courteously over the far end of the counter, in
conversation with one of the Japanese clerks—the Rev-
erend Oswald Fawcett! To be sure, Wilfred knew as cer-
tainly as he could know anything that Mr. Fawcett was at
present on a walking tour in the English lake country. Yet
fSi 266 SU
there he was—
or at least here, in the bank, was one—
an
angel—
a ghost—clad in the limp duck suit affected by
Wilfred's dear pastor—wilting, stooping, seeking support,
giving, even across these wide spaces, the impression of be-
ing defective in eye, in teeth, in complexion, in hair, yet
somehow armored with a sort of pale pre-Raphaelite bright-
ness. ... "A vision—
a vision," thought Wilfred, and
stood frozen, face to face with his conscience across the
throne-room of Mammon. By a sort of divine imperialism,
the foreign conscience, sitting uneasily in Wilfred's Chinese
nature, armed itself, just as Shanghai—that anomalous
growth grafted upon a Chinese mudbank—in time of
trouble, blossoms forth with Aldershot machine-guns. So, in
the brain behind Wilfred's narrow bright eyes, the still
small voice of conscience said, with the faint Lancashire ac-
cent that distinguished Mr. Fawcett, "Wilfred Chew, what
would Jesus say?" There was, unfortunately, no doubt what
Jesus would say. Jesus was an Oriental like Wilfred himself,
as Wilfred had often thought—but an Oriental who never
seems to have had any idea of the value of money. With
one's brain, which is NIammon, one earns money; with one's
heart, which is Jesus, one gives it back. It is lucky, thought
Wilfred's slightly mutinous brain, that the voice of the heart
is still and small, and not too often heard, for to obey it is
expensive—and when that still small voice is heard, it is
heard above all greater noises—
across wide spaces filled
with the clinking of money.
Wilfred hurried, borne on charmed feet, to the side of
Isaev, who was leaning his iron diaphragm against the ma-
hogany flanks of the counter.
'Take this twenty-five yen, Mr. Isaev," mumbled Wilfred
in an uncertain hurried voice. "I made a mistake. It is part
of Mr. Malinin's capital. Three hundred and fifty yen—
that is the sum due to my client."
Isaev's brain moved slowly, but his hand accepted the
aa 267 ffl
money and laid it upon the sheaf of notes aheady on the
counter.
"Be so kind as to give us an envelope/' said Wilfred to
the Japanese cashier. And when the envelope was brought,
he added, between lips still slightly trembling, "Be so kind
as to give us a stalk of sealing wax."
The flaming stick of wax, like the flaming sword of the
angel of Eden, barred Wilfred away from his treasure.
"Now I will write," he said, and he wrote on the sealed
envelope, "Contents: three hundred and fifty yen, being
Sergei D. Malinm Esq.'s capital returned in full, with in-
terest, by G. I. Isaev, Esq. Signed, Wilfred Chew." He put
the bulging envelope in his breast pocket and handed Isaev
the original receipt. Only then did \\'ilfred's eyes seek along
the counter for the vision of his conscience. The figure was
gone. A slight radiance seemed to Wilfred to remain.
But on the steps outside the tall figure of a stranger stood,
wagging a ridiculous sunshade at a rickisha—obviously the
figure of a Frenchman, with a long drooping mustache and
the pulled-down bloodshot e}es of a bloodhound., Wilfred
saw at once that this was his angel; from \\-ithin that crum-
pled duck suit, that sallow skin, his vision of the Reverend
Oswald Fawcett had glowed. "Certainly—certainly—
it
was a vision; a miracle purposely dazzled my eyes—other-
wise I could not have made such a mistake. Ah, I have been
good, I have been good." Wilfred's happy heart chanted. "It
shall be said of me—
'Well done, thou good and faithful
servant.'" His happy heart, washed by the sacrifice, sang, as
it were, in its bath.
At the foot of the steps Olga Isaeva stood, her eyes glow-
ing at the two men from a rigid face. "The money is paid?"
she asked in a high soft voice of her husband.
"Da-da-da," said Isaev calmly, and showed her the re-
turned receipt.
"Tschah! you filth!" shouted Olga suddenly, and spat at
£lll3 268 fffl
Wilfred's waistcoat. She turned to her husband and slapped
his face, shouting a few shrill confused insults in Russian.
Then words failed her. "Ah—ah—ah!" she screamed, and
swayed about, wringing her hands. Several rickisha coolies,
foreseeing that this curious seizure would end in physical
collapse, came and laid the shafts of their vehicles invitingly
at her feet. About forty Japanese bicyclists alighted and
stood round the party. The Frenchman, thanking God that
he was French, bowled away in a rickisha; the thin prancing
brown legs of the coolie, seen from behind, seemed to be at-
tached, in skittish incompatibility, to the long drooping torso
of the passenger.
Olga disregarded her public. She strode over the rickisha
shafts and hurried away down the street, still ejaculating.
Ah—ah—ah! and slapping her clenched knuckles of one
hand into the palm of the other.
Wilfred was paralyzed with astonishment. Feeling quite
sure that Olga Isaeva liked him, he could only suppose that
she was suffering from some kind of fit or convulsion. Isaev
stood looking mildly at the tattered receipt in his hand, as
though wondering whether something in its wording had
provoked her. He remained on the lowest step of the bank
for a few minutes, as though built there, the thin, craning
coolies standing round him like scaffolding. "My wife is
sometimes a little bit angry. .
." he said.
"
After a moment he began. "Tonight my wife will
and stopped, evidently feeling that what he had begun to
say was not worth finishing. Then he said, firmly, "I think
I come with you to Mi-san tonight, Mr. Chew, yes—no?"
mmmA
•T»T»T«T»TfT T»T»T«T«Tt
VMA'
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Whenever Pavel Ostapenko knew that he was hkely to
meet a friend, old or new, he ahvays automatically inquired
of himself whether the meeting was likely to do him credit
or no. 'Is everything all right? Does he appreciate me? Has
he lately seen any one who might have criticized me or told
lies about me? Have I told him the same stor\' as the one
current here?" And as soon as he received Wilfred's tele-
gram from Seoul, announcing his immediate return to Mi-
san, accompanied by Isaev, Pavel, testing in his own mind
the newcomer by means of this third-degree questionnaire,
was annoyed to be obliged to answer, "No. There is danger
here. Isaev may very well withhold the requisite smile as he
greets me—may even be discourteous. He imagines he has
a grievance against my family; he blames his son's downfall
on my daughter. He once called me—(Pavel's very inmost
voice sank to the veriest inmost whisper)—a windhag.
Something must be done about Isaev."
Pavel, of course, disliked Isaev for disliking him, yet he
was so sure of his own superiority that his dislike was en-
tirely impermanent. Simply, the man's disease—dislike of
Pavel—must be subjected to immediate treatment and
£lilJ 270 fS^
cure. To be deeply offended at being called a windbag, one
must suspect uneasily the truth of the indictment, but Pavel
had no such suspicion. Theman Isaev had madea ridiculous
and offensive error
—and of his error he must be convinced
as soon as possible—not by reproach, but by eloquent proof
of Pavel's essential non-windbagacity. The matter of Ta-
tiana's guilt, though still urgently in need of readjustment,
was less urgent than the windhag misunderstanding, since
Tatiana, though certainly a limb of the Ostapenko tree, was
an outlying limb. A man, for instance, would be less of-
fended by criticism of the shape of his little toe than of the
shape of his nose. Indeed, alone with his daughter, Pavel
would have detached her from the Ostapenko body alto-
gether; in speaking to her he would have admitted—and
even insisted on—her guilt in the matter of the jilting of
young Piotr Isaev. But in speaking to Isaev, Pavel would in-
stinctively graft his daughter on to the main Ostapenko
trunk once more, and swear to her inviolate blamelessness
of any interference with young Isaev's peace of mind. And
he would prove it too (with as much ease as he could, in
Tatiana's ear, prove her guilt)—prove it to his own satis-
faction, and perhaps to the resentful father's. When speak-
ing neither to sinner nor sinned against, Pavel would not
entertain the question of sin or justification, truth or lie, at
all. Truth was non-existent, unless he was engaged in pro-
pounding it; in words lay his entire standard of truth,
morals, and behavior.
Much of Pavel's life, therefore—since words were his
standard—
was spent in getting his word in first. It was, for
instance, necessary for him to see Isaev before any one else
in Mi-san should see him. If their first meeting since the
family estrangement should be a public one, Isaev's Osta-
penko heresies might be expressed in the hearing of Osta-
penko believers before Pavel's doctrine of reassurance should
have time to take effect.
(fflj 271 £ilil
"What on earth is the old fool cominghere for?" thought
Pavel, irritated by the necessity of riding fifteen miles to the
railway station on a very hot day. '1 only invited him be-
cause I took for granted he wouldn't come—and because I
thought the courtesy might loosen his purse-strings to my
young couple's advantage/' However, he could not afford to
question the stark necessity of seeing Isaev alone first. Of
course the old snake had probably poisoned Wilfred Chew's
ear already, but incompatibility of language had, one hoped,
been a safeguard to a certain extent. Besides, Wilfred was
a Chinese, and his approval didn't matter so very much.
Pavel, never indolent, was as tireless in defense of his
vanity's interests as is a fish-hawk in providing for the in-
mates of its nest. Before Sunday morning was a morning at
all, before the first knot of the parcel that contained this
coming week had been cut by the first blade of the sun,
Pavel was awake, was forcing the sleepers of his household
to be awake, was shattering with a hurrying candle this
precious blank dark nothingness between last week and next
week.
Seryozha, in the little room behind the kitchen, woke up
and sat up, as the noise of a heavy foot stumbling over a
heavy metal thing tore him from sleep. He lighted a match;
it was just past half past three. He lit the candle and sat for
a few minutes, clasping his big knees, looking down at the
sleeping Tatiana.
She looked so proud, asleep; her mouth was loosened
from its waking anxious, gentle smile, to a slight exquisite
sneer. Her cheek-bones almost looked like shrugged shoul-
ders. She seemed almost crafty now, as if she had escaped,
by wiles and cunning, leaving this pale contemptuous
dummy in her place—had escaped and was free now in a
trackless wild. Tatiana always looked forward to sleep, al-
though she loved life so much. On waking every morning,
she was impatient to be quickly up and living, to get the day
lUfl 272 tS^
soon begun and soon ended, every morning being, to her,
a promise of another night and new dreams. The hither
bank of every river that we must cross is but a promise of
the farther bank—
a promise that gives us courage to swim
out boldly into the current.
Seryozha looked at her face almost resentfully; he was
vaguely conscious that to call her from sleep would be to
recall her from a palace to a cottage—and the knowledge
hurt him. Her pretty mouth, stopped by sleep, seemed more
ruthlessly frank now than when day parted it to say kind,
tentative things. Now, asleep, she admitted that most of the
words she knew were not to be said to him. Waking, she
disguised her refusal by uttering always invented, not
known, words—words of timid conscientious love, warmth,
interest, consent—words spoken only from a tender heart,
not blurted with the lips of a vital body.
With Tatiana, Seryozha was forced to be conscious of
himself. Even side by side with a far-away, sleeping Tatiana,
he was obliged to confront himself with naive comparisons,
to blunder about among clumsy thoughts of right and
wrong. In spite of her remoteness, she had introduced an
unwelcome immediacy into his self-knowledge. Being a
married man was, for him, to be married to a new critical,
shrewish self, that called attention to the slowness of his
understanding, the poverty of his experience, the prosaic
quality of his love, the size of his hands and feet. . . . And
Tatiana stood between him and this new, carping, fretful
self, in the guise of an ineffectual friend and peacemaker—
murmuring unconvincing, yet exquisite, reassurances, gently
decrying injustices and misunderstandings between that
newly-married, ill-assorted couple—Seryozha and his soul.
And, having flattered both contestants with a tender cour-
tesy, she was gone—
a peacemaking neighbor gone to her
home, her duty done, leaving Seryozha and that new in-
ward domestic tyrant eyeing each other suspiciously
fiJJ 273 flJl
*'Was that right?—
was that clumsy?—did that sound
stupid?".. . Oh, never to be alone again.. . .
Seryozha, clasping his knees, looked at his hands. The
knuckles were red and not very thoroughly washed. His
right thumb was made unshapely by a deep old scar. Hewas
not old enough—
first, to value and then to forget the very
thickness and strength of his body. The first stage—the
stage of living unconsciously in his big body as though it
were a twirl of air—was left behind him forever. In the
second stage he now was—the stage of feeling responsible
for, yet betrayed by, his great limbs and hungry organs and
appetites, as a child is embarrassed by the companionship of
a gross aggressive elder brother. Soon he would arrive at the
third stage—the simple serenity of size, the stage at which
the big bones and little soul—lion and lamb—lie down
together dreamlessly in their lair.
Butnowhe looked at his scarred useful thumband sighed.
Hegot up, and after pulling on his shirt and trousers with
a feeling of disgust at their homespun and stained look—
a look he had never noticed before—he went into the
kitchen and found Varvara and Katya prodding a morose
reluctant fire, and Pavel standing over them with a candle,
elaborately repressed curses filtering through his beard.
'1 am going to the station to meet Mr. Chew and Gavril
Hitch," said Pavel. "Some one has to take a couple of horses
to the station for them to ride, and it would seem discour-
teous, I think, to send a servant only." He gabbled a little
because he did not want Seryozha to offer to come with
him. The whole expedition was arranged largely for the
purpose of protecting his son-in-law's illusions about Osta-
penko perfection. But in any case he needed no audience
for the feat of dialectics which was to lure the errant Isaev
back into the fold of Ostapenko orthodoxy. He would not
even have let his wife witness the meeting between himself
and a doubtful admirer; he supposed that she had never
m 274 m
seen him humiliated. '1 leave you, son, in charge of our
women-folk/' he added, boisterously, to Seryozha. 'The
only pair of trousers in a bundle of petticoats—
a great re-
"
sponsibility.. .
Seryozha stretched his mouth automatically to filial ac-
quiescence. This robust paternalism was much easier to cope
with than was the jejune and bloodless nagging of his own
father. Arrogant complacency rebounds from the attention,
but false pathos bores into it, like some unwholesome para-
site.
Yet when, just as the sun, though still invisible behind a
neighbor's roof, threw stripes of gay fresh gold all over the
plain, Seryozha came out to watch the departure of Pavel,
the servant Yi, and the four horses, he was filled with an al-
most uncontrollable longing to go too. PaveFs jocose refer-
ence to the trousers and petticoats had somehow made al-
most articulate Seryozha's momentary weariness of women.
Seryozha stood watching Katya giving confused, strident
directions to Yi, the Korean servant, about a skein of yarn
that she wished him to buy in the town through which the
railway ran. Yi, though he had exchanged his billowing
white robe for a white riding suit with no superfluity except
a discreet drapery about the seat, still retained his horsehair
hat—
a truncated edition of the traditional Welshwoman's
hat, but as small as a doll's. It tottered like a belfry on the
steepled skull-cap that lidded his narrow skull, and gave him
a look of tapering neatness—like a well-sharpened pencil.
Katya, seen in contrast with that impassive skeleton, typified
all that was most exasperatingly petticoaty about women.
She fluttered, she wobbled, she sweated, she squawked;
streaks of hair shook about the mottled nape of her neck.
The lumps of her body were encased in a buttony, patchy,
hooky, stitchy material, like turnips in a sack. Above all she
talked—she wanted something, and wanted repeated as-
surances that what she wanted would be brought to her.
fiJl 275 flJJ
"Bunamayesh? Bunamayesh?" she yawped to the silent Yi,
nagging at him to acknowledge her authority—
as women
always nag, thought Seryozha. Always their petticoats, their
hair, their scent, their bosoms, their voices stuck out from
them, encroaching on space and air, imposing an aura of
artificial excitement and complexity on life. Men, calmly
concave men, walked neatly, sleekly bounded in their de-
cent bones, doing what must be done. These were not the
words of Seryozha's thoughts, but he looked at the great
this-way-and-that fuss of women's footprints on the dewy
grass between the door and the road, and glumly reminded
himself that only a few purposeful, large, well-aimed marks
showed the men's traces. Of course this was largely because
the purposeful feet of Pavel remained still, nobly rooted in
manly authority, while his voice commanded women to
fetch this—
go there—do that—
no, not that, this—
no,
not this, that.
. . . And of course it would be fair also to
add that Tatiana's feet had not smirched the dew at all, be-
cause they were in bed. Indeed, Tatiana's encroachment on
the world, as Seryozha could not but have admitted, was
slighter even than the manliest man's. No intrusion can as-
pire to a point more discreet than the vanishing point, and
Seryozha's wife could hardly diminish much more the reti-
cent trace she left without erasing it altogether. Yet a vague
sense of his own injustice and poor logic did not make him
look with more tolerant eyes on the anxious, hurrying flut-
ter of Varvara and Katya. Indeed, his irritation with these
harmless womenwas merely a revenge for the irritation with
men which Tatiana did not confessedly feel. It was a re-
venge for the gross look that his scarred spatulate hand had
taken on in his own eyes, since that hand had been married
to the brown, unflawed, flexible strip of bones and muscles
that was Tatiana's hand.
And when at last Pavel could find no more orders to give
to his two women, when at last his long legs were astride of
Ul 276 iJiU
the dancing mare and Yihad scrambled up on to the back of
one of the impatiently following horses, Seryozha could bear
it no longer. He ran after the party and swung himself
astride of the last spare horse. 'I'm coming too," he said,
grinning at his father-in-law.
Pavel, taken unawares, could think of no explicable rea-
son why the boy should not come, especially as Yi shouted
his willingness to walkhomeandso leave all four horses free
on the return ride. It was amazing, thought Pavel, how in-
convenient people were. Nobody ever respected the subtle
integrity of Ostapenko plans. Simply because it was impos-
sible to explain those plans to common people, common
people found them easy to thwart.
Seryozha's happy and charming look, as the boy set his
eager horse to canter down the trail, suddenly touched some
forgotten softness in Pavel's heart, however—
it was almost
like a homesickness. "Oh, let him come," he grumbled to
himself. '1 can think of some way to have a quiet talk with
Gavril Hitch."
The way lay for the first half-hour along narrow dikes be-
tween rice-fields, and the horses must dance—with a
slightly sidewise gait—in single file, Pavel now at the head
of the procession, Yi and the spare horse behind him, and
Seryozha at the tail, so that talk was impossible. The top-
pling dike shook under the bouncing tread of sixteen
hoofs—shook frogs and dew and dragonflies out of the
grass into the flooded fields below. The frogs had vermilion
stomachs and grass-green backs patched with black. The
dragonflies were sequin blue. The frogs and dragonflies
sprang out from the dike's brink into the sunlight; they
glittered together between one's eyes andthe dazzling water,
like splinters of kingfisher color.
Seryozha's dog, bursting with happiness, floundered in
and out of the water, snapping genially at frogs, dragonflies,
pigs, butterflies, bullocks, ponies, and even clods of mere
!|J1 277 tSi
earth in a frenzy of joy. It was a kind dog, but in its excite-
ment it rushed at a brood of day-old chicks near a cottage
and set them blowing about the trail like an explosion of
yellow thistledowns. It could have swallowed them as one
swallows yellow gooseberries, but the hen, completely self-
less, instantly made herself terrible—
a super-hen—with
spread ruff and taut spread wings. Masked thus, she rushed
at th^ enemy, positively roaring with heroic anger, clapped
the dog about the muzzle with her wings and after pecking
at its eyes, almost thrust herself into its mouth. The dog,
extricating its teeth from this ardently offered sacrifice, hur-
ried sheepishly away, pretending to be engaged in some new
and worthier chase, but really humiliated—put to flight by
the ridiculous and splendid bird.
The trail in front began lifting itself up out of the rice-
marshes on to higher land, like a water snake coming out to
bask in the sun. No rice, no farms, on the hill—
it was an
untamed hill, furred with velvety, rather sun-dried grass.
Man's only marks upon it were oblong or square patches of
canary-yellow buckwheat here and there, and the headstones
of old forgotten Korean graves, like worn-down tree-stumps
bristling from the roots of their red mud and grass mounds.
As the horses cantered up the diagonally mounting trail,
and Pavel, twenty yards in front of Seryozha, reached the
top of the ridge, the older man's rather heroic bright head
and upslanting beard towered against the sky. An instant
later, all the riders seemed to attain to the level of the low
rising sun, and their endless slim elastic shadows laddered
down the soft slope as far as the farther valley—seven-
league stilts, straddling a dozen distant rice-fields at a stride.
"A fine climate and a fine country," said Pavel, who was
always exhilarated and fortified in his pride by finding him-
self on a horse's back. He looked down complacently at his
titanic shadow—
as big as a rainbow. "Why don't you stay
here, Seryozha—
settle down here and help me with the
flifl 278 fiJJ
horse business? Fll write to your father and explain how it
is. He'd be dehghted, Vm sure, to have you so well set-
tled/'
"Oi—
no—
no!" said Seryozha, startled. Headded, child-
ishly, "You promised I could go home after a fortnight."
Pavel looked at him, surprised. "Why, my dear boy,
you're a free man! You can go when you please—after
Thursday week, of course. We asked you to undertake to
stay with us till Thursday week, in case poor little Tanya
might feel—Well, thank God, things are going well. Still,
you've given your word not to take the child away till Thurs-
day week, when the fortnight will be up. After that, of
course you're free to go home or anywhere you like—but
I can't understand why you should want to. Much more op-
portunity here, in well-governed Korea, than up north,
among Chinese brigands in Kanto. And I could be useful to
you here. I'm in very good standing with the Japanese; this
horse-breeding idea really was an inspiration on my part.
The Japanese have such short legs themselves, they'll give
any price for long-legged horses. How often have I tried to
get a likely cob off on a policeman, five foot one high; but,
no—
a taller horse—
a taller horse, please.. .
." He imi-
tated the polite hissing of a Japanese. "However, I'm here
to supply the demand, and if the Japanese police start using
giraffes, I shall be on hand to breed them, you may be sure.
They know me now as a man who never lets them down
over a horse deal. If you come into the business you could
learn the Japanese language and"
"Oi, no, no!" said Seryozha. "No, but let me go to my
father."
His father, though tiresome, puny, and ugly enough,
seemed to him at this moment more part of the dear ugly
furniture of his home than did his mother. With his father
beside him, as with his claspknife or his dog, he could feel
himself effective, dignified, taken for granted, not to be sur-
m 279 m
prised unawares into childishness. Withhis motherhe could
not always feel this. She was near enough to him to trip up
his pride, to prick his youth to self-consciousness, to rouse
him to effort. It was quietness, non-adventure, that he hun-
gered for just now—
to feast his eyes on the disfigured face
of the home clock, on the little crooked window of his bed-
room at home, on the helpless, humble, unwandering figure
of his father—these were his cravings. He sought every-
thing that was sure to be there—everything that could be
depended on not to be suddenly strange and humiliat-
ing.
"Go to your father, then," said Pavel, curtly. "I can tell
you, though, when I was your age. .
/' And for an hour
and a half he did tell him.
The ridge climbed higher, and though the day grew
brighter, the valleys, being more deeply sunken, were filled
with mist—slung with a canopy of dark steel-colored mist,
which presently the sun would first polish to bright silver
and then roll away altogether. Flowers of a deep brooding
gentian blue burned deep in the grass. Far away, a mon-
strous pyramidal stalagmite of mountains craned to meet a
stalactite of far-flung clouds. Foothills, like dispersed ripples,
lay about the great central wave of land—gathered them-
selves, higher and higher, about the multiple toppling head
—like an immense tidal wave, towering above tributary
waves to overwhelm the valley. The clouds, an inverted
pyramid, seemed to reflect this piled accumulation; there
also, in the sky, were the foothills, the swelling base, and
the apex of the cloud range, as though the sky were a mirror,
answering the stormy earth.
"The Kongo-san,"* said Pavel.
Their trail ran out upon the spine of a sharp spur of hill,
and it seemed impossible to believe that horsemen could
ride down from such an airplane flight of land. On three
* Diamond Mountains, sacred mountains of Korea.
fS^ 280 iJJJ
sides—
to right, to left, and before—distant fields, rivers,
villages, and groves, seen under the horses' chins, were flat-
tened downby a wide weight of glass air. Yet the path which
led the riders, as it seemed, over the brim of this high grassy
world into the air, proved to be a reasonably tame descent—
a fluent series of zeds and esses, zigzagging and looping
down the fluted sides of the hill, in easy, if twisted, gradi-
ents.
By the time the instructive tale of PaveFs youth had
brought him to his first business triumph—('1 said to him,
'Noy my dear sir, that's where you're wrong. I may be half
your age, but I've kept my wits about me and you can take
it from me. . .
.'")—the hoofs of the four horses were
rattling over the bleached, water-worn stones of a dry river
bed on valley level. Sandpipers found an innocent sport in
fluttering invitingly in front of the pursuing dog's nose; their
chicks, nearly independent now, were still obedient enough
to heed the mewof command and be frozen into black-and-
white pebbles, impossible to identify. Acouple of little boys
were herding pigs among the boulders, and screamed with
pleasure at the artless dog's confusion.
Tlie father of the little boys came out of his thatched
shed to watch the riders. Pleased by their rich look, he hailed
them, and, dragging a yellow ground-melon from the tangle
of his garden, shuffled toward them, peeling the fruit as he
came. So earthy was the hand in which he held up the fruit
that black smears were printed all over the pale peeled flesh
of the melon. Yi, the servant, shocked at such manners, re-
proached his compatriot. The peasant, laughing at his social
faux-pas, pulled round his even dirtier coat-tail from behind
him, and held the fruit in that. Pavel, delighted at the
friendly subservience of the Korean, took the fruit and ate
a few mouthfuls of it, nodding in a princely way at the man.
Juice and seeds were tangled in his red beard. When he was
on horseback, it was evident that he would have made a
JlJJ 281 iJiJJ
good king. His chestnut eyes, directed downward at human-
ity under the proudly lowered lids of a man raised up, lost
their staring, round, appealing look. They no longer ex-
pressed, 'Tou must believe me"—they took for granted
that you would. Hespilled a coin or two out of his flat casual
palm as he stuck his heels into his horse's ribs and clattered
away.
"I shall never be as grown-up as that," sighed Seryozha,
riding humbly after him. And he longed the more fiercely
for his own poor inferior old father, as one might long for
even a false word of encouragement.
Pavel was still dealing with his triumphant twenty-fifth
year when the party reached the station. Seryozha's impres-
sion was that his father-in-law had matured extremely
slowly, but no detail of the process remained in the young
man's mind. The station, a humble, flat affair—
a mere
wooden box on the edge of a couple of metal stripes, dis-
tracted Pavel's attention from his recital.
"Here we are," he said. "Only twenty minutes to wait.
I timed that very neatly."
The mud strip that acted as platform, was empty except
for a Korean woman, who squatted on the ground, crying
loudly. Her head was crowned by an elaborate arrangement
of napkin that might have been the pride of a suburban
butler. Wisps of dusty hair clung to her tear-wet cheeks and
she carried a crying baby bound upon her back. Seryozha
looked at her with distaste. "These women.. . . Leave
them behind in one place, they crop up in another. Always
demanding attention . .
."
"What can she be crying for?" he asked.
Pavel took no notice of this. "While we are waiting, I
will ask about your journey back to Manchuria," he said.
"I want Tanya to travel as comfortably as possible. It is her
first real journey since she was a child, and the parting from
her parents is bound to be rather a strain, so I want her to
fSli 282 fS^
be well looked after/' He began talking about the details of
the journey—sleeping berths, hotels, steamers, orders tele-
graphed ahead. . . .
"Oh, I shall never be man enough to arrange all that,"
thought Seryozha. And equally, he felt he must not be child
enough to let Wilfred Chew undertake everything.
While Pavel talked in Japanese, with a patronizing affa-
bility, to the hissing station-master, Seryozha stood near the
weeping Korean woman. He wanted either to strangle her
or to stroke her dirty neck—
it was impossible to be sure
which. As he looked at her, his dog bustled up with its
usual "So-sorry-rm-late-I-was-detained-on-business" manner
and licked the woman hastily on the ear. She screamed and
pushed it away. Seryozha looked at his dog fondly, admiring
its savoir-faire. "What about mydog?" he asked Pavel. "How
will it travel in a sleeping berth?"
Pavel laughed good-naturedly and spoke to the station-
master again.
"You will have to put it in a crate and send it as freight,"
he said, "if you think the creature's worth taking home
again. But if you like to leave it with Yi at Mi-san"
"My dog can't travel in a box," said Seryozha. The dog
cramped itself coyly at his feet, realizing that it was being
talked about, but naively confident that the talk was kind.
"Nonsense! All dogs travel like that here. It's a rule on
Japanese railways." Pavel spoke inattentively, for he was
straining his sight toward the far sun-dazzled spot where
the ostensibly parallel railway lines defied geometry and
converged on the horizon.
"Well then, I shan't go home by train," said Seryozha.
"I shall walk."
"What do you mean?" asked Pavel. His attention, sud-
denly recalled, whizzed down the slippery widening per-
spective of the railway line from the horizon to his son-in-
law. "What do you mean—you'll walk?"
fttil 283 ftiil
"My dog can't travel in a box/' said Seryozha, between
nervously rigid lips.
"My daughter can't travel on her feet/' said Pavel, glar-
ing at him in amazement.
There was silence, bounded on the one hand by the
continuous duet of the wailing Korean mother and child,
and on the other by an insect-like twanging resonance, the
sound of the approaching train. Pavel guarded the rather
precarious integrity of his last word as the train approached.
He knew it had not convinced his incipiently mutinous
son-in-law, but still, as long as silence followed it, it could
be considered as the last word on the subject. And now
the roar of the train might be counted on to drown any
further impertinence.
The train's roar swelled and swelled, just reached the
verge of the unendurable, and then broke, like a schoolboy's
voice, into a falsetto of hissings and steamings, as the train
stopped.
Wilfred and Isaev climbed down. Pavel hurried toward
them; here, the first word rather than the last, was the
important one.
"Excellent, excellent," he shouted, seizing Isaev's slow
hand. "Old friend, you are welcome. You give me the
greatest pleasure." He tried painfully to be economical of
words—
terse and manly of voice. Windhag was a charge
that an amiable taciturnity must disprove. But he could not
resist adding something more—and something more—and
something moreafter that. Nothing but words ever occurred
to him as relevant; if one arrangement of words seemed in
retrospect imperfect or incomplete, nothing but more words
seemed adequate to correct it. Pavel would have proved by
a week's argument that he never in any circumstances ar-
gued.
Isaev opened and shut his wide mouth not ill-naturedly;
he looked inquisitively past Pavel at Seryozha.
m 284 m
Wilfred Chewwas welcoming himself back at his post by
Sen'ozha's side, unaided by Seryozha. "W^ell, my dear old
chap, we seasoned travelers . . . glad to be together again,
are we not? You must be longing to know all my news.
Take a peep at this." He archly drew a corner of the sealed
envelope out of his pocket. "Knowing me and my gifts of
determination, you will have guessed that everything went
like a clock working, othenvise, of course, you would not
"
have seen me back so
"W^at is it
—the trouble of this woman?" asked Ser-
yozha, who could not take his eyes off the distressed Ko-
rean woman. For she was attacking the train in a frenzy—
challenging it to single combat; she leapt with desperate
agility at one door, was pushed out by the train conductor,
and flew to another door. Her baby was shaken like the
rider of a bucking bronco. Trainmen stood ready to push
her off at ever)^ door. But her distraught screams prevented
even the iron-hearted train from starting.
Pavel, checked in a spasm of terse eloquence by the ob-
vious inattention of Isaev, looked round. At once seeing
whither the center of the stage had shifted, he strode to the
woman's side, spoke nobly to her, held her arm as she
gathered herself for a new futile leap at a closed train door,
spoke nobly to the trainmen, nodded his head and said "Ah
Ah" superbly, pressed money into the guard's hand. At once
the train swallowed and digested the woman, and instant
silence swallowed her clamor and that of her baby. Much
gratified by the poor creature's opportune predicament and
its picturesque result, Pavel returned to his friends, saying
gruffly (as unlike a windbag as possible): "Poor wretch!
No money to pay her fare to Gensan—dying husband
there—
."
very easily fixed, fortunately.. .
"You gave her the money with which to travel!" ex-
claimed Wilfred, delighted, as he always was, by any im-
provement in anything. "Your reward will be in heaven."
m 285 ffl
And in his literal mind he imagined Saint Peter making a
little note—Cr. P. N. Ostapenko—Dr. Heaven. To Third
class fare to Gensan. Y1.69.
Isaev, stretching his long thin lips to something that
really looked almost like a smile, banged Pavel's shoulder
three or four times with a wooden congratulatory hand.
He was of a race and class that is easily touched by cheap
charity. Isaev, somewhere inside his impassive body, was
rather enjoying this jaunt. His wife's home in Seoul was
something of a prison.
Pavel, delighted (for now ever\^body loved him safely),
sang tunefully as he tightened up the girth of one of the
spare horses. It was rather difficult hoisting the massive
Isaev on to the back of a horse, and once there, his large
hard seat seemed unable to take the curve of the saddle.
But the horse was quiet, and Isaev, though not steady,
looked calm. Pavel fidgeted with the stirrups, and then,
ceasing his humming, looked up sunnily and affectionately
into Isaev's face, saying, "Such old friends as we are, Gavril
Hitch, aren't going to let a hysterical son and daughter come
between us, are we?" Isaev, a simple soul, smiled. He was
conquered. Pavel added in a more matter-of-fact voice,
"Anyway, the chit's married nowand going to leave us soon.
Here's her husband."
They rode off. Pavel rode beside Isaev, cautiously piling
charm on charm. They were halfway home before he
thought it safe to detach himself from Isaev and come back
to where Ser\'ozha trailed behind the party.
"You couldn't have been serious, my boy," said Pavel to
Seryozha, "in what you said just now about the journey
back to Chi-tao-kou."
So the argument began. It ended as they rode up to the
gate of the house in Mi-san, with Seryozha saying, "My
dog can't travel in a box."
Somehow the question had become almost a religious one
ftffi 286 fflj
with Seryozha now. The askingness of women—the com-
mandfngness of men, had obscurely fermented in his simple
mind, and resulted in this explosion of philocanism. His
dog was the only unbroken reed in sight—the only treasure
saved from the wreck of yesterday. It was absolutely out of
the question to shut the dog up in a box and leave it to the
mercy of Japanese freight porters.
During the next few days the dispute became chronic,
and sadly marred the wedding festivities which the Osta-
penkos tried to revive in honor of Isaev's visit. At every
meal the question came up.
"Seryozha wants to walk back to China because he won't
shut his moth-eaten old wonk in a box.'"
"Well, I wont shut it up in a box," Seryozha said. He
seldom ventured further into the intricacies of debate than
this.
"Whyshould the poor dog be shut up in a box?" Tatiana
always asked. Though the matter had been explained to her
at length, she could not manage to bear in mind the impli-
cations of her husband's determination.
"Seryozha would rather that his wife should walk her
feet off, than that his dog should be shut up in a box."
"Well, I wont shut my dog up in a box."
"Surely there must be some way both to keep my feet
on and to keep the poor dog out of the box," said Tatiana.
She was fond of the dog by now, and usually at this point
called it to her knee and began interrogating it, while trying
to tie its ears in a knot on the top of its head or to fit her
wedding-ring on to the tip of its tail. The dog, heartily en-
joying these mild diversions, slobbered appreciatively down
her shin.
Whenever Tatiana spoke, Isaev looked at her, blankly
and intensely, thinking of his son. Wilfred, watching him
at these moments, nervously felt that just inside the big
clenched trap of Isaev's mouth the word hitch was only
JtJll 287 013
precariously detained. Apart from this unspoken contribu-
tion, Isaev said almost nothing. He ate a great deal and
drank cautiously. He hardly replied, even when Varvara,
determined to keep conversation as equable and normal
as possible, said in her harsh, uninviting voice, *'I suppose
Seoul is a good deal hotter than Mi-san at this time of
year/' or, "Does Olga Ivanovna bake her own bread?"
To Tatiana, the whole problem of the choice between
her own comfort and the dog's seemed perfectly reasonable
and entirely insoluble. She lived always in the minute—
looked forward to nothing more solid than dreams. To-
morrow's practical difEculties seemed as unreal as a story
about some one else. Tomorrow would dawn—the next
chapter of the story must presently be read—but here was
today, and everything else was negligible. She habitually
presented a passive front to her father's contentions. This
cool docility was one of her father's chief difficulties in
dealing with her; she never defied him and never agreed
with him. She seemed to watch his lips moving, rather than
to listen to what they said. She knew herself to be a robust
and tireless walker, to whom the journey to Chi-tao-kou
on foot w^ould be no hardship. But it w^as a matter of to-
morrow, not today, so it did not occur to her to defy her
father, any more than it occurred to her to feel offended
with her husband for his unflattering and unromantic so-
licitude for his dog. In answer to her father's indignant vows
that no daughter of his should tramp like a gypsy, she
nodded herhead. In answer to Ser}'ozha's simple reiterations
that no dog of his should be expected to travel in a box,
she nodded her head. She did not care much for an alterna-
tive so remotely imbedded in the future; if anything, she
cared about the dog's dignity a little more than her own.
Every creature, she took for granted, had a right to its
dignity.
Two entirely different airs seemed to inclose Seryozha
tfif\ 288 fiJJ
when he was talking with Tatiana alone and when he was
talking with Pavel alone. The young human being is in-
stinctively humble with the arrogant and arrogant with the
humble—
yet it was not, in Seryozha's case, so much that
he spoke different things with Pavel and with Tatiana—
as
that he spoke them from a different heart and into a differ-
ent air. From a high heart and into a consenting air he spoke
to Tatiana; from a lowly heart and into a dangerous air he
spoke to his father-in-law. He was, in his own reluctant eyes,
an essentially different Seryozha with the one and with the
other, and his eyes, thus washed with the change in him-
self, saw not only himself, but the world outside, entirely
differently. In Tatiana's gentle and admiring presence, he
saw trees, buildings, clouds, with their faces toward him;
the sun shone on him—he accepted it as his sun—the
shade was spread for his comfort. But in the presence of
Pavel, who imposed uncertainty and immaturity upon him,
he was forced to feel as if he were trespassing on another's
air, another's sunlight and shade—treading on earth in-
different to him; the very wind seemed to turn its back on
him and fawn on another. 'Tace me—
fortify me," the
puzzled young heart cries to the wind. '7 need support—
the old pampered ones don't. Help me to speak in my own
sure voice, out of my equal heart. . . . Turn to me. . .
."
It was like makinga third at a lovers' meeting—demand-
ing attention which can only be impatient and cold when
given.
The remark, "My dog can't travel in a box," spoken to
Tatiana in the field one day, on the way to the stables, was
quite a new remark, expressing a new point of view, new
words spoken by a new Seryozha who brushed the sky with
his upraised head and kicked the grass with large sure feet.
'Tour father says it is ridiculous" (a cold air blew on him,
shrank his heart's new stature a little for a second). 'Tet
JtH 289 £iU
sometimes, Tanya, you know, there are ridiculous things
that can't be made different . . . hke" (he sought in his
quite obstinate mind)—
'like a man not being able to go
to his wedding because he's spilt something on his only
clean shirt. He can't go in a dirty shirt. He hasn't got a
clean shirt. People may laugh, but there's nothing to be
done. Being ridiculous doesn't make the shirt clean again.
I cannot let my dog travel alone, shut up in a box."
"Why, of course not!" agreed Tatiana, watching the dog
take great arch leaps through the long grass. "A dog
shouldn't—couldn't—be shut up in a box smaller than
the size of a meadow. Howwould it run—
or be itself—in
a little box?"
"That's what I mean," said Seryozha, eagerly. "It isn't
as if mydoghad been used to being a kennel dog or tied up.
It's never even worn a collar or seen a chain. You know,
Tanya—that dog runs. It's so sure it mayrun—
it wouldn't
even know enough to distrust the box. It would run into
the box wagging its tail—and stop running—
stop being
the dog it is. ... It isn't that I'm specially fond of the
dog—
it's nothing but a dog," he disclaimed, eagerly, "but
I'm bound, somehow, to let it be the dog it is. There's
something about it being such a lunning kind of dog—
I
have to respect that. . .
." Ser^^ozha sweated a little with
the effort—not only of making Tatiana understand, but
of making himself understand what he meant.
"I know,'* said Tatiana. "I know exactly what you mean.
It would be even worse than—catching that free lark, for
instance, and shutting it in a box. The lark has to be free
to be itself, too—but the dog has to be free within reach
of OUT hands to be itself. . .
."
"Hm!" said Seryozha, rather haughtily. He would have
shot that lark without more than a second's regret—that
short reluctant regret he always suffered when he saw the
Iffil 290 m
fading smile of an animal dead at his hands. It was certainly
true that it would be much worse to stop the dog's running
than to stop the lark's flying.
They both stood still in the grass and watched the lark.
Tatiana's perfect and instantaneous sight showed her the
curious intermittence in the lark's flight; it shot its wings
abroad flashingly, like a bomb of feathers, then completely
shut them against its sides, before spreading them again
and throwing itself like a little stone into the air. In these
wingless intervals, Tatiana could see the lark perched in the
air, unsupported, as though sitting on an invisible nest of
air—then, as its momentum failed, it shot its wings asprawl
again, to catch and toss up once more its little, smooth,
confident body.
Seryozha, very much slower to receive messages from his
senses, saw only a lark fluttering—missed the daring grace
with which it committed itself, unresisting, to the pull of
earth and air. He wished—but not very keenly—that he
had his gun.
"Come," said Tatiana, suddenly. "We shall be late."
She had seen her father hurrying across the stable-yard.
"What for?" asked Seryozha, running beside her. "It's
not nearly dinner-time."
"My mare—Tovarka"
gasped Tatiana.
In the yard, Tovarka the mare lay on her side in the
throes of foalbirth. She had chosen to lie in the yard, though
Pavel and the groom had spent an hour making the loose-
box ready for the event. It is rather chilling how animals
refuse to conform to man's arrangements, or to take the
hints given them by the works of our hands. Doors to come
in at, railings to keep things out, steps to climb up by,
tables to eat at—
a fig for them, say the birds and beasts.
Sparrows ignore the doors and come in at the windows,
splashing impertinent droppings on our tables; flies fly into
our sacred eyes; kites, leaning from the sky, see our carefully
m 291 m
leveled houses upside down and in all the wrong perspec-
tives; magpies mistake the significance of our chimneys;
mice hop in through our fences, not even paying them the
comphment of defiance; cats jump our paths at right-angles,
and spring up walls without the help of stairs, as though the
gravel were wild water and the stairways cascades. Air and
earth are the only roads for these creatures; they will not
learn to read our carefully constructed signposts through the
air. Any opening from air to air is a door to them. And so
the earth was bed for Tovarka the mare; she was just a
creature in pain, lying down on the earth. ... To hell with
man's hygienically ventilated loose-boxes, and clean straw,
and helpful implements.
'Tlease, Saggay Saggayitch, translate this to your father-
in-law," said Wilfred, who was beaming on the birth with-
out admitting that it was an event at all, all animals being
irrelevances to him. "I have thought of a compromise in
the matter of the journey to Chi-tao-kou that should, I
think, satisfy all parties."
Nobody expressed any curiosity. The eyes of all the Rus-
sians were fixed upon the mare. She groaned and heaved
her body. Head-first, the foal began cautiously to emerge
into the world, wrapped in a strange bluish veil. The veil
parted coyly and showed the unexpectedly animated face
of the foal—the expression of a creature having an interest-
ing adventure and determined to get through it with credit
and dispatch. Seryozha's dog, after an incredulous look
during which all panting was suspended, gave an embar-
rassed bark andhurried uneasily away. Mare and foal pushed
—heaved—writhed. The mare never once looked round;
she seemed only interested in her pain. After a few minutes,
the foal lay free, leaning against Pavel's leg, amidst the
iridescent and filmy ruins of its past. It lay balanced on its
breast-bone, its limp double-jointed legs falling upward.
"My idea is," continued Wilfred, surprised and pleased
SJJ 292 UJJ
to find that nobody was interrupting him (the interruption
of a new Hfe within twenty feet of him was no interruption
at all), "that we should hire a Ford's motor-car as far as
Gensan, then take the steamboat to Seishin, then hire an-
other Ford's motor-car to the Manchurian border. . .
."
"Ah, papasha, show the baby to Tovarka," cried Tatiana.
"She doesn't know what's the matter with her. She thinks
she's simply dying of a stomach-ache. . .
."
Pavel, who was a much humbler, gentler, more silent
man, when engaged in caring for horses, signed to the
groom to help him to carry the little wet boneless rubber
beast round its mother's sprawling form to her face. It
seemed as if Tatiana was right; the mare lifted her drooping
head with a look, first of surprise, then of new life. "So
this was what was the matter—I'm beginning, not ending.
. .
." With a little soft, falsetto laugh, the mare began to
lick the foal all over, snuffling with delighted tenderness
into every cranny of its body. "Oh, joy! oh, joy!" whispered
Tatiana for her. As its mother caressed it, the foal began
to be afflicted with strange senseless jerkings; the first hours
of its life were evidently to be spent in passing from one
indignity to another. No buffoon could have made more
slavish efforts to gain a witless laugh than the foal seemed
to make—jerking—humping—hiccoughing—
all its legs
doubling and redoubling—looping like a caterpillar. These
jerks presently resolved themselves into more and more
determined efforts to stand up, and, after a while, with
Pavel's clasped hands under its stomach, it did stand up,
looking like some one completely drunk, yet solemnly hope-
ful of seeming sober enough to pass in a crowd. Its legs slid
and warped in unnatural directions. Its tail was like a little
wet wool mat with a lively mouse underneath it. Its hoofs
seemed very badly-finished and shoddy, like wads of wet
brown paper.
"From that point, Saggay Saggayitch," Wilfred contin-
m 293 m
ued, "the distance to Chi-tao-kou would be negligible. We
could hire a wagon for Mrs. Malinin's use."
Still Sctyozha inexplicably delayed translation. He and
Tatiana stood hand in hand, looking with entranced eyes
at the foal. Their joy at seeing a new live thing, new eyes
open on the air, new feet prepared to run about the earth
—
was like a rendezvous for Seryozha and Tatiana. This
joy was their meeting-place at last; to this trysting-point
the compassionate, cold, complicated heart of Tatiana ran
to meetthe direct, greedy, and simple heart of Seryozha. Liv-
ing was what things weiCy after all—living—and nothing
else, really. In this these two contrary lovers agreed, sinking
their contrariness; they agreed to let things live—
let things
be. This being was the Unknown God, to whom both, ob-
scurely, owed homage—
this exquisite inhumanity—im-
morality—impudence—oblivion—urgency—this tremen-
dous relevance called life. To the admission It ISy nothing
is irrelevant except It Ought To Be. To Tatiana and Ser-
yozha, thinking no thoughts but standing outside them-
selves watching a creature that had been still now learning
to move, it seemed that they were entirely free and entirely
together for the first time. No thought was relevant to their
lives; they were nothing except alive—borne far and
strongly on that sea from the shore of which the silly callow
foal had just embarked.
Wilfred decided to explain the matter himself to Pavel.
He had picked up a dozen or so words of Russian, his
imaginative ear naturally selecting the words whose Russian
sound seemed to him appropriate to their English meaning.
Cobaka, the word for dog, for instance, printed on his
retina as S"barker, made him feel that a high reputation as
a linguist was not immeasurably beyond his reach. Poyezd,
a train, too, was encouraging—
it could be nothing else
but a puffing thing.
"Listen—vot compromise-ski," he cried, addressing Pavel
m 294 m
urgently across the prostrate form of the mare. "Nyet
poyezd—uffteimohile hoiosho. UHteimohile, s'barker
nichevo. UHteimohile from Mi-san to Gensan. Then parry-
hot/' (Parakhot was also obviously a steamer in his mind,
which connected the name Parry with a coal merchant in
London.) 'Tarry-hot s'barker nichevo. Pairy-hot to Seishin.
Then droschki. S'barker hy this route completely nichevo.
That's my idea—take it or leave it, as Londoners say.
Uffteimohile hoioshOy ah?"
Pavel straightened his back. His face was very happy and
kind and running with sweat. Horses were the only selfless
dehght he knew. His chestnut eyes were soft—almost
rapturous.
"Avtomohil hoiosho^ ah?" his lips uttered vaguely in a
benevolent, expressionless voice. After a moment, first the
meaning and then the possibilities of Wilfred's compromise-
ski began to take shape in his mind. Intelligence seeped into
his spell-bound face. "Avtoniohil . . . nu . . . da-da-da
. . . hoiosho. . .
." On the word of approval he began to
nod his head. Tlie continued nodding of his head seemed to
shake his natural complacent nature back into position, as
a watch is shaken to start its ticking again. "Avtomohil . . .
da-da-da . . . hoiosho . .
." He thought with pleasure that
his daughter would appear to the neighbors to be scorning
a mere train—leaving home proudly in a car.
"Good idea, isn't it? UHteimohile hoiosho, ah?" Wilfred
insisted, much pleased.
"Hoiosho—hoiosho."
"Hoiosho? Really hoiosho^
"Hoiosho."
Wilfred clasped his hands together, congratulating him-
self. So like Russians, he thought, consenting to the most
expensive, least practical, plan—without even inquiring
what the expense would be. And all for the sake of a smelly
dog. Still, who was he, Wilfred, to complain? He would
tSU 295 tS!i
travel grandly. The Korean motor proprietor spoke some
Chinese, and perhaps would consider a small commission
—but No—
a guardian angel he would remain to the end.
He looked round for more applause from the bride and
bridegroom. But they were no longer there.
•Y»1 /•¥••
•T«Y*T*1 /••!•¥#
•T*T«Y«T«T*T«y*
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The Butters baby had proved to be twins, and there was
so much extra sewing for Anna to do that she was obhged
to take some home. Her stitching was poor; she did not
mind; she was tired of other people's children. She did not
mind if every garment she made should fall to pieces on
their superfluous bodies. She resented, too, being obliged
to remain so much in the presence of her husband, whose
melancholy and arid figure seemed to her now little more
than a tiresomely deathless reminder of her disappointed
motherhood. She said that her son was dead, she imagined
him dead, but she knew that he was not dead. At the very
root of her mind was the sane admission that there was no
practical reason why he should not return in safety to Chi-
tao-kou, with or without a wife. This root of common sense
was planted deeply out of sight in her heart, however; above-
ground flourished the branching growth of silly premonition
and apprehension—
a growth which she saw no reason to
prune; and from this tangle had lately blossomed her en-
tirely senseless determination to see her son's bride through
the distorting eyes of the dead Alexander—
to call her
Death, and to have no hope. This superficial, yet ardently
m 297 m
nourished, hopelessness did not prevent her from taking
her sewing every afternoon out on to the ramshackle porch
of their house, which commanded a view of the street along
which her son, if he returned, must come. The despair
which ached continually, like a cramp, in her brain did not
prevent her from thinking '111 make curd cakes the first
evening, I think, and Fll kill one of the last two chicks out
of Old Speckly's last brood but one. . .
."
Old Sergei was obscurely glad that his wife's work now
obliged her to spend more time in the house. Her presence
was tempestuous, her words hardly ever kind. Nineteen
years of marriage had made her so wary and contrary a bird
that the little snares he spread to trip her into a complaisant
word of approval or an appropriate and flattering grunt
of agreement were always futile. He was never allowed to
complete his sporadic gestures of preening himself. Still,
even humiliation was better than silence—especially as
there was no mocker at hand to witness his frequent hu-
miliations. Somehow, in spite of Anna's impatience, he felt
safe with her, as one feels safe even in a rough straw bed
after groping in a dark room. Wherever she sat, sewing, he
sat near her, trying not to notice that she often moved
petulantly away. From the porch, however, as he soon
discovered, she would not move away; there, he—sitting
just inside the window—had his companion pinned down.
'1 suppose you sit out here so as to see Ser}^ozha coming
round the corner, when at last he comes/' said Old Sergei
one day.
"Nothing of the kind," said Anna. "I know now that
Seryozha will never come back."
To his teasing, "Well then, why sit out there in the
dust?" she made no reply.
But presently she said something that so much surprised
him that the sense of it fell back from his mind, as a wave
falls back from a rock, leaving its surface dark, glossy, and
m 298 £i21
wet, but its shape unchanged. He Kstened to the low un-
loving tone of her voice, rather than to the words she
uttered, and the tone conveyed to his slow mind nothing
but the usual reproach. Immediately, the house shook and
he realized that she had jumped off the porch. Then he
found, printed on his hearing, as clearly as the shape of a
windowpane is printed on suddenly closed eyes, her words:
"As a matter of fact, here he comes—your son—and the
man that went with him."
"Annitchka! Annitchka!" he cried, absurdly confused by
the discrepancy between her tone and her words. But, as
he feared, she was gone from the porch. What could she
have meant—here he comes—
your son.^ As he rose, trem-
bling, from his chair, he sought foolishly in his mind for
some other possible meaning of those disquietingly simple
words—here he comes—
your son. ... So deeply aston-
ished was he that his sense of direction—his homely fa-
miliarity with every object—every wrinkle—
every dint in
the room, was on the instant lost. He shuffled wildly up
and down, hitting his knee painfully against a ledge that
seemed to have sprung like a fungus from a smooth wall,
rapping his flying knuckles against an anonymous piece of
furniture that could not be the ordinary reliable dresser
that had for so long acted as signpost to his gropings.
"Annitchka! Annitchka!" he quavered. And as he stum-
bled to and fro, round and round, lost in a quivering jungle
of bewilderment, he heard, fined and diminished by the
accurate perspective-sense of the hearing, Seryozha's far-off
shout.
"Mamma! mamma! mamma!"
At the sound of his son's voice, Old Sergei, in a frenzy
of exaltation and desire, saw the dim oblong of the door,
and his own upheld hand silhouetted like a blurred crab
against that incredible squat pillar of light. He was at once
extravagantly dizzy—reeled, swung, moaned, clung to the
m 299 m
dresser, shut his new eyes for a few seconds and opened
them again. There was a roaring of readjustment in his
brain; his whole habit of concentration rushed from all his
senses to that one lost and found sense of sight. He leaned
his numbhands against the wall and planted his incredulous
feet, as though they were wooden blocks, one before the
other—the other before the one—forcing his half-para-
lyzed body to walk along a new path—
a path that his feet
had forgotten—
a path that his eyes could see.
He had lost his power of estimating space by sight; his
feet reached the threshold of the door before his eyes ex-
pected. Daylight towered round him, as though he tottered
in a fountain of terrifying flame. He felt wholly defeated.
The light pressed in on him; he was buried alive in an
avalanche of light. Weighed down by light, he fell to his
knees. As he did so, Seryozha's voice, from somewhere
very near, broke through the roar of his forgotten sense of
hearing. It was as if the blood rushed into a limb that had
been for a moment numb.
He lifted his face, raised his lids. This smear of smoke
in the core of a flame, then—
was this all that Old Sergei
was to see of his son? Better to be blind, thought Old
Sergei, wildly, than to seek in vain through this terrifying
new world of fire for the lost face of his son. More lost than
ever before, it seemed, for now the promise of returning
sight was a broken promise. "Ah! ah! I can't see you! I
can't see you!" wailed the old man.
'Tou shall! You shall!" cried Seryozha, giggling with
excitement. "J^st be hopeful, papa darling—
just be hope-
ful for a minute."
An appalling smell now awoke to consciousness another
of Old Sergei's momentarily neglected senses. Something
of revolting texture was rubbed against his eyes. "What's
this? What's this?" he screamed in a fury.
"Just be hopeful—be hopeful," Seryozha's voice went
m 300 m
on. His father could feel the boy's breath on his brow.
What was this filthy, stinking pad over his eyes that shut-
tered away his son?
'Take it away, boy, take it away. Let me see your face/'
"Can you see my face?" asked Seryozha, withdrawing his
magic poultice.
And it seemed to Old Sergei as if that urgent creating
young voice cut like a knife through the thin crumbling
texture of his limitations. Something that felt like a dark
doubt in himself was pushed away from his heart and from
his eyes, as the blinds of the house of a dead man run up
to admit the sun when the coffin is at last carried away. He
felt like a man who, in a dream, finds that he can fly. The
voice of his son created before his eyes—
a face—
a huge,
shimmering gray turnip close to his eyes, much bigger
than the sky, with features like clouds. It was like an
Olympian practical joke, that face—
a mask, with blurred
craters for eyes, crooked streak for nose, broad black scratch
for mouth. Yet, imperfect and grotesque as was the geog-
raphy of this globe within six inches of his eyes, it was
obscurely but surely the face of Seryozha. Every second
brought in partial focus some new identifying blur on one
plane or another of this refound world that was his son's
face.
"I can see," whispered Old Sergei, and he could not
speak again. Tears ran out of his eyes and trickled past the
corners of his trembling mouth. His cheeks were sucked in
with the breath drawn to utter words he could find no voice
to say. He leaned toward his son and put his arms round
his neck, hanging against him, dizzily swaying.
Seryozha, snorting and snuffling with emotion, almost
carried him back into the living-room, seated him in the
armchair, and knelt at his feet, stroking the old twitching,
tear-smeared cheeks. "Papa, papa—mypapa," said Seryozha
m 301 m
in a soft voice, feeling that there was nobody he loved so
much in the world.
Anna, panting behind her son (who had run to his
father), arrived in the doorway. She came and leaned over
the back of her husband's chair, feeling so full of delight
that even the narrow wispy skull of the old man—
across
which she saw Seryozha's face—looked lovely to her.
"And he looks so well," she said, ardently describing the
boy to her husband. 'Thinner, perhaps—but so well. . . .
Tschah! there's no doubt about it, he's a fine boy, our boy,"
she added with a deafening hiccough, as she shook her
husband's shoulder. Neither the old man nor the young
one acknowledged her remarks. Seryozha went on saying,
"Papa—
papa—papa," stroking inquiringly with gentle
blunt fingers the skin round his father's eye-sockets. Ser-
yozha felt a creator's pride—almost a paternal pride, as if
he had begotten a new papa. "Let there be hght," he had
said, he was the god of a new genesis.
The dog was not being welcomed home at all, but it
did not mind. It wandered about the room, sniffing deeply,
welcoming itself home. A dog's nose may be said to do
something more for it than simply reconstruct the past,
since the word reconstruct implies a certain effort of the
imagination—
an element of guesswork. A dog, I think,
smelling a smell, does not guess what has happened, it takes
for granted—
just as we, hearing a friend calling us, a horse
neighing, or a clock striking, have no need for guesswork;
our sense has told us someUiing, not hinted at something.
The dog, smelling traces of a past event, is a witness of
that event; time is no obstacle; as long as a smell clings, so
long is yesterday—
to a dog—current news. A dog could
surely make some contribution to the theory of relativity.
"Here," mused Seryozha's dog, "that horrid little goat lay
down. . . here, the old woman dropped an egg. . . here
(Si 302 £121
stood that Korean watercarrier whom I always bite ... in
this chair a missionary sat, carrying a parcel of clothes the
paper of which once had something to do with dried
raisins. . .
." The room confessed its past to the dog, re-
serving nothing that a smell could tell. Presently the dog
had a piece of luck—
a pleasure of the present interrupted
inquiry into the past. Near the threshold it found a piece of
fish offal in such a condition of delicious decay as even
the dog—
a connoisseur in putrescence—seldom had the
good fortune to unearth. It stood warily half in and half
out of the door, fearing to have its treasure snatched from
it, masticating hastily with a breathy sound like ga-haow
—ga-haow—ga-haow.
Anna began to feel a little offended with her family for
being so preoccupied. "And where is the bride?" she said,
a little less sweetly, straightening herself. "'Have you
dropped her somewhere on the road?"
"Yes," said Ser\'ozha, dreamily, and then, as if ceasing to
murmur the word papa had broken a spell, he pulled him-
self together and rose from his knees. With a light-hearted
leap backward, using his arms as crutches, he sat on the
table.
"Oh, papa," he began in his natural, noisy, indifferent
young voice, "everything went so beautifully. I got your
"
money—
or rather, Mr. Chew got it
"\Vhere have you left Mr. Chew?"
"He was here. I expect he went back to show Tanya the
"
way. But, papa, Olga Ivanovna was
"
"Yes, but where is
"Well, but, papa, how much d'you think we got? Guess.
Well, your two hundred yen had swelled to three hundred
and fifty! Worth going for, wasn't it? And, papa, I saw a
mare give birth to a foal. You've no idea Oh, but
listen, papa, at Mi-san they have eighteen horses, counting
"the three yearlings
tS^ 303 tS&
Anna stood looking along the table at his broad baclc and
shoulders, feeling injury swelling in her heart, like the hot
assembling blood in a pinched finger. "What's this—
papa
—
papa—
papa—
no mamma at all?" Was it for this she
had counted the days, rolled her curl-papers on a tear-wet
pillow through long nights? She made a difficult effort to
keep her voice sweet. "Begin at the beginning, darling boy,
and tell us everything. It isn't really true that you're married,
is it?" Perhaps the bride called Death was a dream, she
thought, or Seryozha's letter a joke. She had the unphilo-
sophical habit of challenging proven facts to prove them-
selves again—and yet again—and even then of blotting
out those twice-proven facts like hated dreams, daring them
to materialize again.
"Yes, I am married," said Seryozha, checked in his bois-
terousness, but still looking at his father as if he shared a
secret with him.
"Such nonsense!" said Anna, vehemently, almost glad to
have an excuse to sharpen her voice. "If you could see the
child," she added to her husband, nudging him to remind
him that he should join in the reproach, "you would say
like me that for such a baby to marry without his parents'
consent is worse than nonsense—
it's wicked, undutiful
nonsense."
"Papa can see me," said Seryozha, and Anna had once
more the impotent sense of speaking to unhearing space
—
as a diver's voice, under the sea, is swallowed up, re-
absorbed, by his own imprisoned hearing.
"Such nonsense!" she said again, more bitterly, and then,
realizing what Seryozha had said, she looked rather sharply
at her husband to see what the boy could mean. Although
it seemed to her that there was a look of vision in the old
man's eyes, she discounted the remark as nonsense, for the
present, for she had no attention to spare for her husband.
"Get off the table, Seryozha, and let me get tea ready."
m 304 m
She would not try to make curd cakes today, she thought,
wearily.
"And, papa," resumed Seryozha without moving. "What
do you think? Gavril Hitch's wife beat him in the street, be-
cause he paid up your money. Mr. Chew told me. Beat him
—think of that! You remember Gavril Hitch—
like a great
dumpling—
you can imagine how funny it must have
looked. . . . Oi!—
I did regret not being there. . .
/'
Anna, thwarted in her hopes of spreading the tablecloth,
stood grimly watching him. In spite of her feeling of injury,
she gloried in the sight of him—his size, his straightness,
his independence.
"Ai, that old clock," said Seryozha, interrupting himself.
"I often thought of its ugly old face while I was away."
*'And your mother's ugly old face?" asked Anna.
"I often thought of that, too," cried Seryozha, jumping
off the table and throwing his arms about her. But she
hardly had time to feel delight, for he spoke to his father
over her shoulder. "Papa, in a field in Korea we saw a plough
worked like a motor-car—
no bullocks at all. The furrow it
made was so straight and deep."
He was sitting on the table again, his hand descriptively
ploughing the air in front of him.
"For God's sake, where is this wife of yours?" grumbled
Anna, in a softened voice. "Where have you left her?"
"In the new temple," said Seryozha, the smile that be-
longed to the marvelous plough still parting his lips. "Mr.
Chewsuggested our coming on ahead, and she seemed quite
pleased. She is not like other girls—always asking for at-
tention."
"But is she there alone?"
"No. With Katya's niece."
"Who is Katya and who is her niece? For God's sake,
don't talk so foolishly, boy."
"Katya is Varvara Alexeievna's servant. . .
." And as
Seryozha said this his eye fell on the tablecloth on her arm
—
still torn and stained, still not mended or washed, just as
he had seen it the day he went away. And the words in his
mouth—Varvara Alexefevna's servant—
sent his mindback
to his mother-in-law's neat house and orderly possessions
—the sunlight, through clean panes, lying patterned on a
clean floor; the pressed linen that clothed Varvara's awkward
yet leisured body; the busy effectiveness of Katya. He re-
membered the departure from Mi-san, which, owing to
Pavel's dramatic sense, had appeased that craving that was
in Ser}'Ozha, as in all young creatures, for the dignified con-
duct of great affairs of sentiment. There had been the pant-
ing Ford at the door, and in it a large crate of unfamiliar
shape. "Whose package is that?" 'Tours," said Pavel, su-
perbly. "Half the Ostapenko family silver for Pavel Osta-
penko's only child. And I'll send her mare up by road as
soon as I can arrange it, and the black gelding for you, my
dear boy. And here is my daughter's maid, Marfa, Katya's
niece, for I want the child to be well looked after. And here,
Ser}^ozha, is the child's dowry.. .
." He handed him a draft
for two thousand yen. Seryozha had felt ideally well treated
for the first time in his life. All that was needed was a grave
and literary blessing, and this Pavel at once supplied. "The
God of Heaven give you a prosperous journey, my children.
Tanya, you're a married woman now. You must honor a
newfather and mother; they are your parents now, and from
them let me hear a good account of you." He kissed his
daughter on the forehead. And then Van^ara rather spoiled
the noble austerity of it all by crying wildly: "Take care of
her, Seryozha—there's no one like her. . . . She's different
—she's special. I commit her to you as a special trust. . . .
Be very good to her. . .
." Then she gasped, with a rush of
tears, "If there are babies, Seryozha, let me be there—
I
must be there. ..." A scene to make a man of a boy in-
deed, thought Seryozha. Even Varvara's tears, though awk-
tS^ 306 ta
wardly shed, had been a tribute to his grown-up dignity. And
now—home to this threadbare muddle—
to be reinfected
with the virus of childishness by his incurable mother. For
a few seconds Seryozha saw his home, and all his longing for
home turned sour.
His mother watched his expression change and a sullen-
ness come into his eyes. "Ah, tschah!" she said, hurt by this
result of his glance in her direction. '1 won't bother you
with questions, then. I'll leave you to talk to your father. I'll
go to the new temple to meet your Tanya."
She felt like a horseman whose unmanageable mount
suddenly kicks out at a friend standing by, to whom he has
been tr\'ing to talk charmingly. Here was her warm heart—
its warmth all in vain—mounted on this clumsy steed of
manners and body.
But Seryozha was still imbedded in his past. He could not
yet bear to let the then dissolve into the now, "We had such
a journey," he said, dreamily. "By motor-car from Mi-san to
Choanji, and we let Mr. Chew take the car and luggage
from there to Gensan while Tanya and I walked through the
"
Kongo-san
"But the expense. .
." quavered Old Sergei.
"Tschah! We are rich now. Expense is nothing. Why,
papa, wehave brought a huge box full of family silver. . .
."
Anna went out, patting Seryozha's wrist wistfully as she
passed him. He smiled at her as she did so. "Mamma dar-
ling, we must live quite differently now. . .
."
The new temple was so new that it was not yet finished.
The molded mud gods were already enthroned, but they
were not colored yet. To make up for this rather ungodlike
nakedness, somebody had put a fresh hollyhock in each
god's hand. They looked like ladies trying on their engage-
ment rings in their baths.
On a ledge between one god and another sat Tatiana.
tSi 307 M
Anna was quite shocked to see how hght and small and
beautiful her son's bride was.
Wilfred Chew was standing in the middle of the court-
yard, looking contemptuously up at the dolphin-bristling
roof-ridge and the curly, dragony eaves.
"Ah Mrs. Malinin/' said Wilfred, brightly. '1 see I am
to have the pleasure of introducing your daughter-in-law to
you. Mrs. Malinin senior, I beg to present to you Mrs.
Malinin junior." He rubbed his hands together cheerfully,
expecting some kind of outburst of womanly cackle. But
neither Mrs. Malinin cackled at all. Anna, feeling stout, hot,
and suspicious, sat down on the same ledge as Tatiana, two
gods away from her.
"Why do you stay here all alone, daughter?" asked Anna,
after huskily beginning to say several other things. "Why
don't you come to our home?"
Tatiana looked at her kindly and warily, as a deer, know-
ing its retreat safe, looks between the trees of a forest at
some strange visitor. "Ai!" she said. "Seryozha isn't such a
very married man, dear Anna Semionovna, that he can't
have his first few minutes at home without his wife. Be-
sides," she added, "poor Marfa has a sore heel."
From another chapel of the temple, across the courtyard,
Anna could hear a heavy and vulgar groaning—"O God! O
God! . .
." Going forward a few steps, she saw Katya's
niece—
a fat, flushed, straw-haired girl, sitting in a lump on
a low step at the foot of an unfurnished altar, soaking one
gross foot in a basin full of warm water. Beside her stood
two kind Chinese priests, dressed like coolies (for they had
been interrupted in mason's work), except for their priestly
pill-box hats. The priests, in producing the warm water, had
obviously exhausted their resources for dealing with blis-
tered female Big-noses. They looked kind, helpless, and de-
pressed, and Marfa, who was not of martyr stuff, did nothing
lUl 308 liJJ
to spare their sympathetic feehngs. "O God!*' she groaned,
vigorously. "O God! O God!"
"What is it—
a bhster?" asked Anna.
"O God!" rephed Marfa.
Anna, leaning over it, saw that there was indeed a big
broken blister on the heel. But she did not care. Her heart
was quite hard just now. Not knowing what to do about any
of these problems, she resented all of them; she did not
know what to do for Marfa's heel, what to do about wel-
coming Tatiana, whether to make curd cakes or not, howto
find a double bed for Seryozha, whether to tip these kind
priests.. . . Her imagination, usually so ingenious, had
come to the end of its supply of ingenuities. Nothing oc-
curred to her for Marfa's relief except uncompromising am-
putation of that ugly foot, or immediate strangling of the
sufferer. She therefore turned in silence toward Tatiana
again.
"I ought to kiss her, I suppose," thought Anna, desper-
ately. "And she is certainly a most beautiful little creature."
Her thoughts added, "But she is called Death."
Tatiana's lack of precedents showing her what to do in
these circumstances was even more complete than her
mother-in-law's. Anna had temporarily lost her social re-
sources, but Tatiana had never found hers. Tatiana's quick
heart never prompted her in the solution of personal prob-
lems. She kept her heart for other purposes; her heart's eyes
were incurably longsighted. She would never have been at a
loss with a trapped mouse, but a trapped mother-in-law
seemed to need some subtlety of treatment, the nature of
which did not occur to Tatiana at all. She realized that a
mouse and a mother-in-law have, in these circumstances,
something in common—she saw this in Anna's eyes, and
felt most tenderly sorry. Animals, she knew, were not com-
forted by touch, but people, she believed, sometimes were.
So she leaned forward, round the intervening gods, and
m 309 m
lightly stroked Anna's arm. Then she sat back to watch the
result. Anna watched her, without moving.
"She'll be shaking hands with me next/' thought Anna,
remembering things that Alexander Weber had said.
Tatiana, trembling a little, decided to talk. If she were
careful to be polite, talk could do no harm, thought poor
Tatiana.
"I do think your Manchuria is beautiful/' she said. "Not
like land at all—
real land is always so surprising round the
corner—but like the sea which has no surprises and no
corners. But it is a winter country, this, Anna Semionovna,
isn't it
—although the sun is so hot now. It looks to me as
if winter really lives here, and just sleeps half the year, like
a snake."
"It is a winter country," admitted Anna, moodily, anxious
at once to make the worst of it. "Remembering Manchuria
from far off, one would never remember sweating in green
still weather, or seeing the coolies in their big straw hats, or
fetching water from rivers that run toward the sea. . . .
Smelly furs and cracking black rivers and wind and end-
lessly sore fingers and melting the water to boil the tea in
the dark morning—
that's Manchuria as you'll remember it
some day. A winter country indeed."
"Some day you must come home with me, dear Anna
Semionovna, and see our Korea. Especially our Kongo-san.
Ai! ai! you should see the sunny chffs come forward through
the mist to bow, and then go back." And she began to talk
with a tense, trembling enthusiasm about such things as
mountains, mists, cascades like stringed harps. It seemed to
the surprised Anna that the child's ardor had no flame in it,
but only the stinging quality of ice.
These flowers of sight were furled in Tatiana's sight like
those Japanese toy water-flowers that lie disguised and secret
like flakes of sawdust in the hand, but, tossed into water,
expand into lilies and roses and orchids. The secret miles
!ffil 310 m
flowered in Tatiana's mind, as she drew them one by one
out of silence into this fresh element of words. The path
across the Diamond Mountains opened before her, arched
with sunlight.
"It was a path through the air," said Tatiana. "We
jumped from rock to rock; we scarcely trod on soil." She
remembered their course with the glowing, almost theatri-
cal, exaggeration characteristic of her—over-emphasis of
memory combined with under-emphasis of tone. She re-
membered their flying course from brow to brow of tall
boulders, like the course of two clouds from peak to peak,
over waters choked and knotted by these bowling boulders
—waters jerked this way and that, foaming like horses vio-
lently checked in their course—waters dammed into pea-
cock-green pools, to spill over paradoxically, in the wrong
direction, by secret exits. "Seryozha swam in a pool; I saw
him like a white frog from the top of a round rock. . . .
Yes, we were like the chipmunks and the kingfishers, Anna
Semionovna, our paths were all through the air or through
the water. One could bite the red maple leaves as one
jumped from rock to rock. . .
/'
While she talked in her clear soft voice, Anna watched
her doubtfully, her mind half-consciously echoing her own
last words—
a winter country indeed. She felt dimly a little
flattered by the child's cool wariness; it seemed a tribute to
the definite, un-Anna-like impression she was making,
thought Anna. Inside this pink bewildered body was no
confidently mature critic—
no mother-in-law at all, really,
if Tatiana had only known. But Tatiana, luckily, did not
know. Tatiana fixed her alert, wild-fawn stare on the outer
Anna and tried, with cautious words, to propitiate that
outer Anna, that apparently solid symbol of authority. "She
thinks myhands knowhowto do things—mymouth knows
how to say things," thought Anna, feeling proud and sur-
prised, smoothing down her miscontrived, mis-cut apron
•fifi 311 fiW
over her stomach and feeling that it was being gloriously
mistaken for a real, bought, mother-in-law's apron. But still
she was not sure. Still that fading illusory glitter of icy ruth-
lessness hung about Tatiana—
a last gleam of the witch-
glare thrown on her name by poor Alexander.
".
. . a little meadow where the abbots were buried/'
Tatiana was saying. "The grass was as green as
—
as a squir-
rel's fur is red . . . and each grave was of black marble, and
its throne was a tortoise and its crown was a bandage of
twisted dragons.. . . Even the rough common stones
round that place had crowns on, like the roofs of little
pagodas. Tame marble tombstones for the tame saints, I
suppose, and wild stones over the wild mountain saints.
There was a praying mantis on one dragon's claw, and Ser-
yozha's dog came snifhng—
so
—and the praying mantis
prayed, 'O God, make this dog ashamed,' so God did . . .
the dog sneezed for shame. . . . We saw the sea and a
great thin waterfall from a high path.. .
." She remembered
the silver wire of sea strung across a gorge, hooked tautly
from a maple to a pine, and another wire of water-r- jointed
and vertical this time—leaning up a broken precipice across
which a frayed intermittent smoke of clouds blew lightly.
"Surely there is nothing to be afraid of here," thought
Anna, hardly listening to the words of this strange, cloudy
talk.
But Tatiana, though she realized faintly now that she was
not quite so safe as she had hoped, in talking of clouds and
cascades to a new mother-in-law, could not forget the
clouds. Clouds raced across her eyes, especially those last
clouds that had dragged the dwindling mountains from her
sight. . . two strata of clouds—hardly to be called by the
same name—cloud—
so far apart were they.. . .
There
was the still, cushioned world of clouds from which the
mountains grew (for the mountains had no roots in the
earth).. . . And in front of the faces of the mountains.
fSi 312 JJJ
adding incredibly to their stature, shreds and skeins of
stormlit clouds, torn across the pinnacled air, white on steel-
blue, silver on white—clouds rent and raveled on sharp
peaks like wool on needles. Somewhere Tatiana had heard
God's beard likened to white wool. "Ah, those mountains
are held down by clouds," said Tatiana, "not held up by
earth. You have to believe in clouds when you see them
like that—
as you have to believe in that bee. . .
/'
A big bee on a level with their eyes was pushing her bul-
lying way into a chr^^santhemum's heart, irritably elbowing
petals right and left, her furry muscles trembling with rough
strength.
"Do you always talk about clouds?" asked Anna.
"Clouds? No. WTiy should I talk always about clouds?
It is so seldom one sees the live bodies of clouds. Generally
talk about clouds would be like talk about dead saints—
generally they are so still and so high. Whocould talk about
them then?"
"Can't you talk about my Seryozha?" asked Anna.
"You're his wife and I'm his mother. He's more interesting
than a cloud, isn't he?"
Tatiana thought for a minute and then said, "Yes,*' in a
shamed voice. She was never safe from a sense of guilt, be-
cause she had no standard of behavior. She had talked un-
suitably to this unknown ear, she now realized. She would
not have been surprised if Anna had told her to go back at
once to her parents—
a wife found wanting, a disgraced
daughter-in-law. It would not have occurred to her to assert
her rights. The command to turn the other cheek, even,
would have been wasted on Tatiana—she knew of no right
not to have her cheek slapped—she knew of no rights at all
except the right to see out of her eyes.
"He has a little rash on the back of his neck, I see," said
Anna. "How did he get that?"
"Yes, and also on his behind," said Tatiana, gravely. "It
fffil 313 flJJ
came after he swam in a mountain pool and lay in the sun
on a rock." She turned her accurate mind's eye on Ser-
yozha's rash and considered it; she could see the shape of the
patch of pinkness on Seryozha's skin as clearly as, a minute
ago, she had seen the shapes of the clouds.
"It is only sunburn, then?" suggested Anna.
'1 think it is/' agreed Tatiana.
"He has a sensitive skin."
"Yes—and bright, like a horse's. . .
." Tatiana thought
with delight of living bodies as she said this.
Anna sighed. Yet at the same time she thought: "This
wife can't take Seryozha away from his mother. Why, it's
as if he had bought a new telescope, not married a wife.
This girl may be new eyes for him, his father may be new
ears, but I shall still be in his old heart. Death—tschah!
she is not death—she is nothing at all. . .
."
A priest, with a kind eager bow, brought them two cups
of leafy tea. These visitors, the priest thought, had evidently
forgotten that they did not live here. Tlie tea was a polite
hint of a limit—
a tactful unspoken good-by.
Anna thought, "Of course I mustn't mention Alexander
Weber. That would be a thing I should regret very much
afterwards." But even while she was congratulating herself
on having—
just this once—been wise in time, she heard
her own voice saying, "You know, I saw a good deal of
Alexander Weber before he died. He talked a great deal
about you."
"Ah, poor Sasha!" said Tatiana in a low voice—though,
as a matter of fact, she cared scarcely at all now about
Sasha's death. He was dissolved from her thoughts. She had
such a short, thin-spun memory that her mind's eye never
saw ghosts. "Perhaps he told you, Anna Semionovna, that I
was possessed by a devil."
Tatiana hesitated and shuddered. Seryozha, who felt that
his feats of magic were not to be hidden under a bushel, had
m 314 tsa
told her his story of the magic smoke. Like all such vague,
unlikely stories, it had taken on an aspect both more star-
tlingly magic and more convincingly prosaic, on Seryozha's
lips. The further it retreated into the realm of legend, the
more facts were remembered by Seryozha to prove its solid
truth. Every conscientious liar who has an occult experience
to relate must have noticed this curious posthumous skele-
ton of facts that materializes to uphold a fading ghost of
fiction. C'l know I wasn't dreaming," we say, "because I
remember I'd just got up to let the cat out, and I noticed
distinctly it was raining, and I was just going to tell mywife
so when I saw a curious light in the corner—
just there—
I
can show you the exact spot. I know because I could see the
comerof the piano and said to myself that it needed dusting
—
so that shows you. .
." etc., etc. In just such a hard
mold of facts, the faint fluidity of an uncertain, unexplained
experience sets into the jelly of a ghost-story.)
The first lie that Tatiana had ever told herself was this—
that the story of her possession by a devil—now cast out—
was true. This lie—
this illusory salvation from an illusory
devil—
was her desperate anchor to normality, her license to
believe herself a woman now—
a woman plucked out of
shameful fairyhood, her defense against being an outlaw
and alone. Did Andromeda, chained to her rock, dream
through the dark night of a lover beside her, unloosing her
chain—and smile uneasily in her sleep—half awake, yet
clinging to her dream, trying to believe that she was no
longer a dragon's prisoner beside the lonely sea, but brought
home to a lover's arms? In such a dream Tatiana lived, her
heart stirring awake, her lids shut firmly against waking.
Every time Tatiana repeated this lie to herself, she shud-
dered—such a shudder as makes people say, "Some one
walked over your grave." She shuddered now as she said to
Anna: "It was true, what he said. I was possessed by a devil.
!lJ4 315 fiSfl
I was so much afraid of men—they were the only animal
that didn't seem lovely to me . . . that was a devil's teach-
ing. But Seryozha drove the devil away—by magic, he says,
and also, Anna Semionovna, by being so lovely himself.
. .
/' She was her father's daughter. She sought in her mind
for a password to Anna's credulity—
a word that should
once and for all prove her lying claim of fleshliness to be
true. 'I'm as much a woman now, Anna Semionovna . . .
/'
as a sow is a sow. .
"Ah, tschah, childf' cried Anna, startled. She looked at
her small, trembling daughter-in-law and noticed that she
had become very white. "Presently," thought Anna, "she'll
be horrified to remember that she said that." And instantly
she felt at ease with Tatiana.
Wilfred Chew approached them. "Ladies," he said, "I
don't wish to butter in on your family conversation, but
don't you think wehad better be getting home? The foot of
this girl Marfa will not be better in a minute; she might as
well make the effort to arrive at your home and perhaps
treat it with some kind of healing plasters. Shall we not now
begin our little walk?"
Tatiana came to her feet with a dancing spring, feeling
vaguely that a dreaded word had been spoken and swept
into the unmattering past. As she did so, Anna felt a rush
of gratitude and tolerance toward her. She seized her
clumsily by the arm.
"You pretty child, don't be afraid of me. . . . Fm not
brave, either," she mumbled, her tongue stumbling over her
teeth.
Tatiana ducked her shoulder away, though, having done
so, she smiled a bewildered and compassionate smile. She
hated touch; she instinctively looked upon hands as so many
traps. Still, having withdrawn herself, she felt tender. What
should she say? What should she say?
ftfft 316 523
"I did enjoy seeing the porpoises from the boat, too/' she
said. *'They were such well-made porpoises—and they
didn't seem to know we were looking at them."
A slope waving with standing Icao-Iiang eight feet high,
over-ripe for harvest, lay all about the new temple. A path
from the temple door to the gate of Chi-tao-kou tunneled
straight through this rigidly vertical jungle. One looked
along a golden corridor, upheld by a million delicate pillars,
intersected by a thousand passages. Even the sunlight lay
geometrically, in neatly recurring diamond shapes, on the
ruled red soil.
As Anna, Tatiana, Wilfred, and the wailing Marfa en-
tered under the first arch of this long shimmering aisle, two
tiny figures appeared at the further end. They seemed snap-
shotted through that far starry lens that focused the sunlight.
"Here are your respective husbands," said Wilfred. "A
family reunion indeed." Hethirsted for gratitude and praise.
"I have brought you a very nice daughter-in-law, Mrs. Ma-
linin, have I not?"
"Ah, well enough," snorted Anna and gave a croaking
laugh. As she turned to smile at Tatiana, she caught a
glimpse of a bar of sunlight combing the girl's chestnut
hair. "I am wishing my old husband could see her," she
added, warmly and remorsefully, remembering that she had
called the child Death and that a blind man would bear the
accusation in mind without seeing the vivid defense.
"He can see her," said Wilfred, complacently.
"WTiat do you mean?"
"He has been cured of his blindness by an application of
Chinese medicine. And it is not surprising. Doctors all over
the world are appreciating more and more the truths under-
lying the Chinese science of medicine."
"Has he speaked that he can see?" asked Anna.
"My dear lady, I was present at the cure. I was, in fact,
responsible for the cure, though Saggay Saggayitch made
tSli 317 tS&
the actual application. At once your husband said—in Rus-
sian, of course
—My goodness, I can see perfectly clearly."
"Ah, tschah! he is being at his old trick again," said Anna,
crossly. 'It is all lie, this blindness ... he never has been
blind, I think."
The offended Wilfred turned quite pink. "You are a lady
of little faith, Mrs. Malinin, like in the Gospel. If you had
been present at the miracle of the Gadarene swine, you
would have said that the poor creatures had been suffering
from hydrophobia all along."
"Well, perhaps they was," snapped Anna, still ruffled.
Regretting her daring pronouncement at once, however, she
recalled it ungraciously. "Oi, no—of course, Mr. Chew, I
know these pigs have not been—
I know my husband has
been blind—
it is a blindness of nerve—of hysterics, the
doctor speaks. One time before, he has been seeing for a
few minutes."
"This time the cure is entirely permanent," said Wilfred,
firmly.
Meanwhile the two groups had been drawing nearer to
each other, and now Old Sergei called to his wife, "Look,
Annitchka, I can see. I am walking alone!" He had been
rather dazzled by the light in the open streets, but now in
this avenue of crested spears he could open his eyes bravely
and feel whole again.
"What did I tell you?" exclaimed Wilfred.
"Magnificent!" shouted Anna, half ironically—and then
was penitent, hearing again that unsympathetic reservation
in her own voice. "Magnificent," she said again, yet still,
she knew, her voice was not quite right. As the two halves
of the family met, she threw her arms roughly round her
husband's neck and gave him a loud kiss on the corner of his
mouth. That was better, she thought, though not perfect.
And suddenly she realized for the first time that nothing
terrible had happened or need happen at all—on the con-
£|J3 318 fiJJ
trary, they might all be happy together now forever. Al-
though Seryozha had come home at last, she had not, till
now, looked forward to serenity. Her mind had been ad-
justed to mistrust of the future. Now, naive anticipation of
endless flawless happiness rushed into her heart.
"Let's have a party tonight," she said, giggling with pleas-
ure. 'The Malinin wedding-feast. We can ask your cousin
Andryusha, my darling, and Mitya Nikitin with his bala-
laika. . .
."
"Excuse me," said Wilfred. "I will wait here and guide
the carter with the luggage to your house." He wanted time
to think of some subterfuge that might excuse him from
presence at the feast. He had eaten and drunk one Russian
feast too many, and the thought of another made his Chi-
nese stomach turn.
Old Sergei was timidly andhopefully peering at his daugh-
ter-in-law's shining face. "You are welcome, daughter," he
said, after a moment. "God be blessed, who brought you
to us. God bless your father and mother. . .
."
As they walked home, Korean and Chinese neighbors
who had known of Old Sergei's blindness, stood gaping and
shouting good-natured questions and comments. Seryozha,
taking these as personal congratulations on the success of
his magic, stepped proudly along.
The house, as soon as they entered it, began to shake with
the tread of Anna walking confusedly about, talking of the
party, her volatile mind continually drawing red herrings
across the trail her feet were set on. The air was haunted
with murmurings—"If I had a few young carrots I might
. . . then there's that tin of asparagus that the missionaries
... or one ought, strictly speaking, to whisk a spoonful of
olive oil round the . . . but sardines for zakuska wouldn't
be good enough. . . spring onions standing in the cut-
glass tumbler. . .
." Each thought called her back empty-
handed from the last uncompleted search.
m 319 sa
"I might help, perhaps," said Tatiana, following her
about, a little puzzled.
'Tour Marfa might help, perhaps," said Anna, irritably.
"She behaves as if no one ever had a blistered heel before.
Ointment perhaps might soothe. . .
." She launched her-
self on a new course. "But there won't be enough dessert
plates for both plums and walnut cake. . .
."
This unobtrusive pursuit by the anxiously helpful Tatiana
shamed Anna, by imperceptible degrees, into some kind of
effort at organization. "Well, we might at least begin to mix
the pie," she said in a firm reproachful voice, suddenly dash-
ing a pie-dish down on to the table. "And I'll go now and
get the little Lai boy next door to run and invite our guests
for a copper or two. I suppose now, Tanya, your mother has
everything to match—plates—
little plates—dishes—
ever}'thing. . . The samovar, I dare say, is much finer than
mine . .
."
"It is more proud-looking, perhaps," admitted Tatiana.
"But its face is not so kind."
Old Sergei and his son were at last left in peace in the
living-room, but they could find no more subjects for pleas-
ant talk. All Seryozha's experiences seemed to have become
twice-told tales in the course of seventy minutes.
"You ought to see that Mr. Chewis given his money when
he comes in, Ser^'ozha," said Old Sergei, and directly he had
uttered the words you ought, Ser\-ozha knew at last that he
was in the same old home again, with the same old nagging
father. Seryozha's face hardened, and he adjusted his wits
to the old game of inventing irritating retorts. "I will leave
that to you now, Seryozha," continued the old man. "For
you must begin to take a little responsibility—not expect
me to do everything. I think you might give Mr. Chew a
little more than we arranged. Wedo not want to be mean,
and he has certainly done well by us."
"Oh, papa!" exclaimed Ser)-ozha, scornfully. "A little
^
£|JJ 320
more, you say. Why, you haven't rearranged your ideas at
all—for all my explaining everything.. . . Don't you re-
alize we're rich now? Three hundred and fifty yen from
Seoul (it's settled on Tanya in the deed, to be sure, but
only in case of my death and of course I shan't die—
I feel
as if I shall live to be a hundred and twenty-seven), and two
thousand yen dowry.. . . Andall through Mr. Chew's clev-
erness. Why, we shouldn't be giving him too much or beg-
garing ourselves if we gave him half the Seoul money.. . .
He arranged everything about the journey. It's his doing
that Tanya and I are here safe and sound; his knowledge of
Chinese science made all the difference to Tanya's state of
health, and he arranged that she and I should meet; he drew
up our marriage paper and arranged the money side of it;
he went to Seoul and got twice as much moneyout of Gavril
Hitch as you or I would have dreamed of—and then his
scientific knowledge gave you back your sight, papa.. . .
Why, what we owe him is beyond thinking—and you go
talking about a little tip, as though he were a coolie. . .
."
New sight had made Old Sergei more easy to abash. The
world seemed more menacing, now that he could see it.
"Well, of course he has done a great deal. ... I don't
want to be mean. . . . Let me see, the arrangement was
fifty sen a day over and above his expenses (which I suppose
you have already paid)—and ten per cent on the hundred
and fifty yen interest on the Seoul money.. . . Fifty sen a
day for four weeks . . . that's fourteen yen—and the ten
per cent makes fifteen yen—twenty-nine yen we owe him
actually.. . . Yes, you are right, it does seem poor pay for
so manybenefits, nowthat we can afford more. . . . But we
aren't millionaires, Seryozha, you know. . . . Well, sup-
posing we give him a present of a hundred yen over and
above what we owe him—
say, a hundred and thirty yen al-
together. . . that's roughly half. . . . Yes, I think we may
say that's due to him."
fiiA 321 fSli
His unpractised eyes, blinking at the sunset in the door-
way, saw Wilfred's figure pass across it. Wilfred was walk-
ing up and down the chicken-yard musing, alarmed chickens
splashing from under his feet.
"Mr. Chew," quavered Old Sergei. "Tell him, Seryozha
(you have the money ready in your hand, haven't you?)
—
tell him that we have been discussing the great success
that has attended everything that he has undertaken on our
behalf, and that we beg him to accept a little present of a
hundred yen, over and above the actual salary—
as a little
token of our gratitude. Say it graciously in your best English,
Seryozha.. .
."
Seryozha's blood ran cold at the very idea ofraying or do-
ing anything graciously, and blushing crimson, he blurted
out, "My papa speak—and I speak also—thank you most
indeed for being most kind and wise indeed. All very good.
Hoiosho, hoiosho. We pay a present of a hundred yen—
here, please, take—
also the thirty yen we speaked before.
See this paper."
"I refuse it," said Wilfred, immediately. "With many
thanks but without the slightest hesitation I refuse the
present. Twenty-nine yen is what you owe me, not thirty.
As for the present noJ*
The sunset, pouring into Wilfred's eyes- across the
chicken-house during his walk up and down the yard, had
exalted him—inspired him with a feeling of kinship with
suns and saints. Hewas transfigured by thesplendor of him-
self—his self-satisfaction had found a new self to be satis-
fied with. The Reverend Oswald Fawcett was for the time
being undisputed king of his soul. It was absurdly easy to be
good.
"I refuse this present," repeated Wilfred, "as I would re-
fuse the half of your fortune, should you offer it to me. I am
above presents. I have no fear of poverty, believing in the
following motto—'Do good and no evil shall touch you.'
ffll 322 JiJJ
Saggay Saggayitch, please note carefully what I am going to
say and translate it all, accurately, to your father and mother
—and to any other interested party. If I have helped you—
and there is certainly no doubt that I have—
it is because I
was sent to help you. I have this quite clear in mymind now;
in the light of this beautiful sunset illumination, I have en-
joyed a kind of revelation. I have been divinely sent, to help
you all over your lame dog's stile. It is no merit—
no favor of
mine—
all that I have done," continued Wilfred—and
truly he felt triumphantly humble on his own behalf. He
was conscious for the first time of his littleness—conscious
of the tremendous garment of Christianity that he had tried
on, and flaunted himself in, so many times, and now, for
the first time, seriously donned. He was conscious of this
great magic grafted fruit of English righteousness, swelling
and ripening round that small indigestible pip that was Wil-
fred Chew.
'If you only knew," he said, "how improbable it was that
I should come to Chi-tao-kou—
to Manchuria at all, indeed,
—Sir Theo Mustard had changed his plans by the barest
chance—but there is no such thing as chance, however
bare. Chance is the Lord's choice. I have proof of being
thus chosen. The catching of that fish, Saggay Saggayitch
—three times did I dream that exact scene, in advance, and,
dreaming, heard a divine voice saying 'Wilfred Chew, the
inside of this fish can cast out devils and heal the sick.' The
Lord was choosing me ... as His man of business, so to
speak, to make your paths straight... If I had been sent
by a human benefactor, of course, as a lawyer I should not
dream of giving away his secrets—
even if he were a king, I
would be discreet, despising advertisement of any kind. It
is good to keep close the secret of a king, but it is honorable
to reveal the works of God. Saggay Saggayitch—
I am a
work of God—
I reveal myself to you—not as myself, Wil-
fred Chew (an imperfect and ignoble person), but as a work
KlJ 323 £|iiJ
of God—
a messenger of God. I have been sent in answer to
the prayers of good people—yourselves. People that sin are
enemies to their own life. Saggay Saggayitch (remember to
translate all this ). Tell your father that I am sent as the re-
ward of goodness. He was good, leaving his dinner that day,
as your mother told me, to go and do his duty by his dead
friend, yet for a time only misfortune seemed to result.
Blindness—poverty—the difficulty of getting his lawful
money from Mr. Isaev at Seoul ... all these things af-
flicted him, yet still he was good—he prayed. Thesame with
your wife; she was afflicted bya devil—andshe prayed. And,
in answer to these prayers, I was sent by God to you—
or
rather, not I, but an angel in this poor body of mine. It is as
if you had seen a vision all these days, Saggay Saggayitch—
you thought you walked with a mancalled Wilfred Chew—
a mere barrister, of the Middle Temple, London—but
really you walked with an angel. Often, during these weeks,
I have felt quite strikingly not myself; something guided my
hand even when I did notknowit, something saved mefrom
sinning.. . . And when my outward man fell from grace
(on one occasion at least you were a witness of it), eating
and drinking far too much, I am ashamed to say—
even
then, something within me sat apart—the angel in me sat
apart—neither eating nor drinking, simply occupied in ful-
filling the divine commission. Translate all this now, please,
Saggay Saggayitch."
Poor Seryozha was staggered. Hestammered in Russian to
his father, "He says that he has been God's angel to us."
'1 am surprised that he should say so himself, but it is per-
fectly true," said Old Sergei, bowing to Wilfred. "One can
see God's hand in all that he has done. But surely he said
more than that."
"He said that a great manytimes," said Seryozha, guiltily.
'It was all I understood."
"Have you translated it all properly, Saggay Saggayitch?"
m 324 M
asked Wilfred, a little surprised at the condensing tendency
of the Russian language. He was so anxious that the point of
his remarks should reach the old man—that this stream of
inspiration that he felt flowing through his heart and lips
should not be dammed by misunderstanding. "Does he un-
derstand, Saggay Saggayitch, that I am not praising myself
—that I am not an angel, though an angel traveled inside
me? Does he understand that I am myself a great sinner?"
He was very anxious to have his meaning made clear—not
only the fact of his possession by an angelic spirit, but also
his new idea of himself as a great sinner used as a divine
mouthpiece—
a Chinese Saint Paul. "Does he understand
all that? Tell him how I sinned. Tell him I was drunk."
"He was drunk," said Scryozha to his father.
Old Sergei started. "Well, well!" he murmured, feebly. "I
dare say the temptation was strong."
"Docs he understand everything now?" asked poor Wil-
fred, anxiously.
"Everything indeed," replied Scryozha.
Wilfred, however, was determined to take no risks. He
leaned over Old Sergei and seized his hand. Old Sergei's
straining, peering face was turned upward, like the beak of a
fledgeling about to be fed.
"Listen, Mr. Malinin. Ya pJoJchof cheJovyek. .
."
"Nyet nyet/' murmured Old Sergei, politely.
"Da da—phkhoi chelovyek. But at the same time,
BoWs chehvyck. . . Hoiosho—ah?"
"HoTOshOy hoTOshoJ"
*'Hoioshor
*'HoTOsho, hoiosho, hoioshoJ'
"Then all is now understood," said Wilfred, radiantly.
"I will now leave you."
"Won't you stay to dinner?" asked Anna, who, as they
now saw, was standing in the doorway, peeling a potato on
to the floor.
flifl 325 ffl
"Ah, Mrs. Malinin, have you heard all that I have been
saying?"
"Indeed yes/' said Anna, with vague warmth. "Most in-
teresting indeed."
"Ah, then you can talk it all over with your husband.
. . . Tell him I think it would make an interesting and
helpful book—he should write such a book, Mrs. Malinin.
I want every one to know about it all. I want this," added
Wilfred, standing in the doorway, "because these feelings
are the largest feelings I have ever had in my life. . .
."
His lips twitched. "I think now that this is a good adventure
that we have had. ... I want people to know about it so
as to be helped to be good. I feel that in going I leave good-
ness with you.. .
."
But as he walked away, tense with excitement, goodness
went with him down the street. The ghost of the Reverend
Oswald Fawcett held his hand.
"Yes, indeed," said Old Sergei, after a moment's silence.
"He is right. It is as if God had sent His angel to help us.
Do you remember, Annitchka, you once said you wished
that God would send His angel to take care of our Seryozha
on his dangerous journey to Seoul, and I said that God had
forgotten poor Russians. I was wrong. I believe now that I
was wrong. Godwill remember us
—give us happiness again.
God will remember poor Russia again, poor Russia now be-
ing scourged for her sins—and bring not us, Annitchka, but
our children and our grandchildren back out of exile. Yes,
Russia is passing through the fire, and will be desolate for
a time, but God will have mercy and bring her children
again into the land, where they shall build a Russia, not like
the first, a new Russia. They shall return from all the places
of their exile, and build up Russia gloriously. Ai, Annitchka,
we shall not see it, but Seryozha's children will see it."
But Anna's voice came from the kitchen, whither she had
retreated. "Seryozha, draw up that bench to the table, and
fiJJ 326 fS&
your father's big chair/' She reappeared, panting, in the
doorway. 'Tou and Tanya—bride and bridegroom—
shall
sit on the bench at the head of the table/'
Seryozha sat on it to see how it would feel. If Sonia Mat-
vievna were to sit beside him, he thought, it wouldbe a good
joke to slide one's behind violently up the bench and push
her off, catching her round the waist as she fell. But with
Tanya, this would be a senseless thing to do.
"No, we old people shall not see it," continued Old
Sergei's sad murmur. "But perhaps that is in itself a mercy,
for much trouble will come first. I can feel trouble coming.
Why, Seryozha, this place—only twenty-five versts from
the Siberian border—could be blotted out in five minutes
by bombs . .
."
Marfa limped in, carrying a vase tightly filled with copper-
colored zinnias. She laid the cloth and lighted the lamp. In-
tensely blue sky shuttered the window. Walls and ceiling
glowed with a vulgar pleasant golden light. From under the
shade of the lamp a tent-shaped radiance spread. The tiny
lamp in front of the ikon, high up on a triangular shelf across
the corner of the room, trembled like a star above the com-
mon groundling promise of the room.
"Oh, well, if we are bombed," said Seryozha, "we can all
go and live at Mi-san. ... I should like to take up horse-
breeding as a profession. Papa, you've no idea how . .
."
"The lamp—the lamp—how pretty!" murmured Old
Sergei. "I can see the lamp."
"There's a knock at the door," said Anna, standing hic-
coughing with delighted excitement in the steaming kitchen
doorway. "The first guest.. . . Tanya, the tray of zakuska.
. . . Marfa, pick up that potato peel.. . . Seryozha, open
the door.. . . Ai, everything is cooking nicely. Ai, ai! Isn't
everything happy, my darlings!. . . Isn't this going to be
a happy feast . . .
!"
